Introduction
============

Portland is projected to add 140,000 new jobs and 260,000 new residents
over the next 20 years. As Portland and the region grow, however, there
is a continuing challenge to maintain the natural environment, economic
prosperity, and overall quality of life. If in 2035 the percentage of
people who drive alone to work remains near 60% as is was in 2015,
traffic, carbon emissions, and household spending on vehicles and fuel
will all worsen significantly. In order to accommodate this growth, our
transportation system must provide Portlanders safer and more convenient
ways to walk, bike, and take transit for more trips. The Transportation
System Plan is the 20-year plan to guide transportation policies and
investments in Portland. The 2035 Transportation System Plan guides
investments to maintain and improve the livability of Portland by:

1.  saving lives and reducing injuries to all people using our
    transportation system

2.  limiting traffic congestion so transit and freight vehicles can move
    more reliably

3.  reducing carbon emissions and promoting healthy lifestyles

4.  keeping more money in the local economy, as we spend less on
    vehicles and fuel

5.  creating great places

The TSP meets state and regional planning requirements and addresses
local transportation needs. Transportation planning that promotes active
transportation modes is essential to preserving the City’s livability
and for the protection of the natural environment Constructing
significant amounts of new automobile capacity to accommodate growth is
not a desirable option because of the enormous costs and impacts. Adding
more streets and parking lots divides neighborhoods, uses valuable land,
encourages urban sprawl, and has negative environmental impacts.
Alternative approaches, supporting a safer, more affordable and more
complete multimodal transportation network must be used to ensure
integrated, comprehensive solutions. The first TSP was adopted by
Council in 2002 (Ordinance 177028).

The Transportation System Plan helps implement the City’s 2035
Comprehensive Plan in addition to the region’s 2040 Growth Concept by
supporting a transportation system that makes it more convenient for
people to walk, bicycle, use transit, and drive less to meet their daily
needs. The TSP also recognizes that the transportation system must help
grow and sustain the City’s economic health by accommodating the needs
of businesses and supporting Portland’s role in the international
economy.

Why is this important?
----------------------

The transportation system is essential to the functioning of the city
and the well-being and prosperity of the community. It connects people
and businesses to goods and services, and links them to the region,
state, nation, and world. Although transportation is often measured in
terms of mobility, it also creates access to opportunity. The way we
build our city has an impact on our mobility and, by extension, our
access to opportunity. These goals and policies also reflect the role of
transportation planning in reducing carbon emissions and improving
public health. Finally, this chapter acknowledges the role that streets
can play in providing great civic and recreational spaces.

With its 1980 Comprehensive Plan, the City of Portland became a national
leader in the integration of land use and transportation. The 2035
Comprehensive Plan builds on that tradition and adds new innovations.
The goals and policies in this chapter increase the focus on complete
multimodal transportation systems. The historical emphasis on automobile
mobility increasingly creates a cost burden on households and the
community as a whole. For the city to successfully meet its
transportation system goals for the future, other more affordable
choices must be widely available and safe.

What is the Transportation System Plan?
---------------------------------------

The Transportation System Plan (TSP) is the 20-year plan to guide
transportation investments in Portland. The TSP meets state and regional
planning requirements and addresses local transportation needs. It
includes:

1.  Policies that guide the maintenance, development, and implementation
    of Portland’s transportation system.

2.  A list of projects necessary to accommodate 20 years of growth in
    population and employment, including a financial plan.

3.  Master street plans and modal plans.

4.  Strategies and regulations for implementation, including street
    classification maps.

Elements of the TSP — the policies, the projects included in the List of
Significant Projects, street classification maps, and street plan maps —
are adopted as part of the Comprehensive Plan. The TSP itself is adopted
concurrently with the Comprehensive Plan but is published under a
separate cover. For ease of use and transparency, the citywide policies
from the TSP are also included in this chapter of the Comprehensive
Plan.

The TSP also provides more detail than the Comprehensive Plan by
including additional sub-policies and area-specific policies, and
additional supporting information about transportation system
conditions. The TSP contains the transportation element of the City’s
Public Facilities Plan. Figure 9-1 — Transportation System Plan:
Relationship to Other Policies and Plans illustrates the relationship
between the TSP and other policies and plans.

The 2035 TSP includes:

Goals and policies that guide the maintenance, development and
implementation of Portland’s transportation system

Objectives that further the implementation of the goals and policies

A list of projects and City wide programs along with a financial plan
that will accommodate 20 years of population and employment growth

Master street plans and modal plans

Strategies and regulations for implementation, including street
classifications

Elements of the TSP
-------------------

The goals and policies, street classification descriptions and maps, the
financial plan and the master street plan maps in the TSP are adopted as
part of the Comprehensive Plan, but published under a separate cover.

For ease of use and transparency, transportation related policies from
the 2035 Comprehensive Plan (2015) in Chapter 9 (Transportation),
Chapter 3 (Urban Design), Chapter 4 (Development) and Chapter 8 (Public
Facilities) are included in the Reference Section (Appendix A). The TSP
also includes additional sub-policies, geographic -specific policies,
and objectives.\*\*

The TSP is both an implementation tool and a supporting document to the
Comprehensive Plan. It contains the transportation element of the City’s
Public Facilities Plan, and the List of Significant Projects and
Citywide Programs. The TSP also provides more detail than the
Comprehensive Plan by including additional supporting information about
transportation system conditions.

Transportation System Plan Updates
----------------------------------

In order to keep the TSP current and up-to-date with recent
transportation planning and development activities, it is updated at
regular intervals. The first two updates were not intended to include
new policy initiatives. They were primarily technical in nature and
included corrections, updates to project descriptions, updates on
studies, and inclusion of new master street plans adopted as a part of
planning efforts.

The first update was completed and adopted by City Council on October
13, 2004 (effective date, November 12, 2004; Ordinance Nos. 178815 and
178826).

The second update was completed and adopted by City Council on April 5,
2007 (effective date, May 5, 2007; Ordinance No 180871). While primarily
technical in nature, this update also included new policy language to
implement the City’s Green Street Policy.

The Stage 2 update is a part of the City’s Comprehensive Plan update and
changes were made to implement the Comp Plan, as well as reflect adopted
plans and classification changes since the last update in 2007. The
Stage 3 of the update (2016) will incorporate regional information,
update geographic policies and objectives, additional street
classification changes, modal plans, other changes as identified, and
reformat the document.

REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
--------------------

The TSP addresses and complies with a number of State and regional
goals, policies, and regulations, as summarized below.

### State of Oregon

#### Statewide Planning Goals

Oregon has 19 goals that provide a foundation for the State’s land use
planning program. The TSP must comply with all applicable State goals.
The two goals directly applicable to the TSP are Goal 11: Public
Facilities Plan and Goal 12: Transportation.

#### Transportation Planning Rule

The Transportation Planning Rule (TPR) implements statewide planning
Goal 12: Transportation. The TPR requires State, regional, and local
jurisdictions to develop Transportation System Plans (TSPs) that comply
with TPR provisions. These provisions include reducing vehicle miles
traveled (VMT) per capita by 10 percent over the next 20 years, reducing
parking spaces per capita, and improving opportunities for alternatives
to the automobile.

#### Oregon Transportation Plan

The Oregon Transportation Plan (OTP) serves as the State’s TSP. Regional
and local TSPs must be consistent with the OTP.

### Regional Metro

#### Regional Transportation Plan

First adopted by Metro in 1983, with latest update in 2014, the Regional
Transportation Plan (RTP) serves as the regional TSP. As such, the RTP:

Is consistent with the requirements of the State TPR and OTP

Implements the 2040 Growth Concept and Regional Framework Plan

Focuses on the regional transportation system

Includes multimodal functional classifications and street design
classifications

Includes a list of major system improvements

Includes a funding plan

#### Region 2040 Growth Concept

Metro adopted the 2040 Growth Concept as part of the Regional Urban
Growth Goals and Objectives (RUGGOs) in 1995. The 2040 Growth Concept
stated the preferred form of long-term regional growth and development,
including the urban growth boundary (UGB), density, and open space
protection. It also designates design types, such as central city,
regional center, town center, and main street.

#### Regional Transportation Functional Plan

The Regional Transportation Functional Plan (first adopted in 2010, last
updated in 2012; Ordinance No 10-1241B) implements the Goals and
Objectives in section 2.3 of the RTP and the policies of the RTP, and
replaces the regional parking policy of the Urban Growth Management
Functional Plan (See RTFP Title 4: Regional Parking Management.) It
provides policy basis and direction for local TSPs. The RTFP codifies
requirements that local plans must comply with to be consistent with the
Regional Transportation Plan. Therefore, its requirements are binding on
cities and counties.

#### Urban Growth Management Functional Plan

Metro adopted the Urban Growth Management Functional Plan (UGMFP) in
1996 and updated it 2014 to implement regional goals and objectives
adopted by the Metro Council as the Regional Growth Goals and Objectives
(RUGGO), including the 2040 Growth Concept and the Regional Framework
Plan. The UGMFP addresses the accommodation of regional population and
job growth. Its requirements are binding on cities and counties.

#### Regional Framework Plan

The Regional Framework Plan, adopted in 1997, identifies regional
policies to implement the 2040 Growth Concept, preserving access to
nature and building great communities for today and the future. The plan
was amended in 2005 and 2010, and again in 2014 as part of the adoption
of the Climate Smart Strategy.

### City of Portland

#### Comprehensive Plan

Portland’s 2035 Comprehensive Plan guides land use development and
public facility investment decisions between now and 2035. This guidance
is intended to help make Portland more prosperous, healthy, equitable
and resilient.

The Comprehensive Plan includes five elements that work together to
accomplish this goal:

Vision and Guiding Principles

Goals and Policies

Comprehensive Plan Map

List of Significant Projects

Transportation policies, classifications and master street plans

The goals and policies in the TSP convey the City’s intent to:

Create a coordinated, efficient, and more affordable multimodal
transportation system.

Make cost-effective investments and system-management decisions that
encourage people to choose healthy, active, and low-carbon
transportation modes and systems, and enhance the economic
competitiveness of the region.

Reduce service disparities and achieve equitable access to all types of
facilities and transportation modes.

Ensure safety for users of all transportation modes, with attention to
the most vulnerable users, including people with disabilities, those
using mobility devices, the young, and the elderly.

Guide the location and design of new street, pedestrian, bicycle, and
trail infrastructure.

Direct how and when transportation infrastructure is managed and
maintained.

Provide policy guidance for developing and implementing the
Transportation System Plan.

Within the Comprehensive Plan and TSP, there are nine Transportation
goals:

Safety

Multiple goals

Great places

Environmentally sustainable

Equitable transportation

Positive health outcomes

Opportunities for prosperity

Cost effectiveness

Airport futures

Transportation related policies from the 2035 Comprehensive Plan (2015)
are located in Chapter 9 (Transportation), Chapter 3 (Urban Design),
Chapter 4 (Development) and Chapter 8 (Public Facilities). The TSP also
includes additional sub-policies and geographic -specific policies and
objectives.

Chapter 9: Transportation
-------------------------

policies are grouped in these subject areas:

Designing and planning

Land use, development, and placemaking

Streets as public spaces

Modal Policies

Airport Futures

System Management

Transportation Demand Management

Parking Management

Finance, Programs and Coordination

Chapter 8: Public Facilities
----------------------------

Funding

Public Benefits

Public Rights of Way

Trails

Stormwater systems

Chapter 3: Urban Form
---------------------

Citywide design and development

Centers

Corridors

Transit Station Areas

City Greenways

Employment areas

Pattern Areas

Chapter 4: Development
----------------------

Design and Development of centers and corridors

Designing with nature

Portland Bureau of Transportation also using Comprehensive Plan Chapter
2: Community Involvement for its public involvement policies.

Chapter 2 has seven goals and 41 policies.
------------------------------------------

### Goals

Community Involvement as a Partnership

Social Justice and Equity

Value Community Wisdom and Participation

Transparency and Accountability

Meaningful Participation

Accessible and Effective Participation

Strong Civic Infrastructure

### Chapter 2 policies are grouped in these major areas:

Partners in decision making

Environmental justice

Invest in education and training

Community assessment

Transparency and accountability

Community involvement program

Process design and evaluation

Information design and development

SEVEN OUTCOMES
--------------

Working with our partners at Metro, Bureau of Planning and
Sustainability, and the Oregon Department of Transportation, with
direction from the Portland Plan (2012), the Climate Action Plan (2010),
Health Equity & the Transportation System Plan Report (2012), and from
the Comprehensive Plan Update, Portland Bureau of Transportation (PBOT)
staff developed an outcomes based approach to the TSP.

These seven outcomes directed policy choices as well as informed the
development of criteria for selecting and prioritizing TSP Projects and
Programs. The Transportation System Improvements Chapter contains
details on the citywide project and programs process and evaluation.

These seven outcomes are:

Improve access to daily needs, such as jobs, schools, grocery stores,
and health care

Reduce/eliminate transportation fatalities and injuries

Improve health by increasing walking and bicycling

Increase economic benefits, such as access to family wage jobs and
freight access

Ensure disadvantaged communities benefit as much or more than
non-disadvantaged communities

Reduce global warming pollution from transportation

Prioritize the most cost-effective projects
