Transportation Objectives
=========================

The objectives contained within the TSP offer further details to support
the Comp Plan Goals and Policies. Objectives are specific statements
that implement, and help assess incremental progress towards, the goals
and policies. Some objectives contained within the TSP are required for
compliance with State and Regional goals, policies and regulations.

**Objective 9.1 Community Involvement (formerly Objective 6.1-6.2) **

**9.1.a.** The Portland Bureau of Transportation (PBOT) will provide
meaningful opportunities for equitable community involvement in shaping
the plans, public policy and projects that support implementation of the
Transportation System Plan.

**9.1.b.** Provide and document concerted efforts to engage those with
the potential to be impacted by the plans, public policies or projects
in order to evaluate and mitigate disparate burdens, especially for
under-served and under-represented communities including Limited English
Proficient (LEP) communities, communities of color, low-income
populations and those traditionally underserved by transportation
services.

**9.1.c.** Furnish opportunities for early and ongoing access to
balanced information about plans, public policy and projects.

**9.1.d.** Keep interested parties, and those who may be impacted by
particular decisions related to plan and project implementation,
informed of direct and related engagement opportunities.

**9.1.e.** Engage and support community members who are traditionally
under-represented in bureau projects, plans, and processes.

**9.1.f.** Provide funding that is adequate to carry out equity driven
public involvement best practices.

**9.1.g.** Foster a culture of equitable public involvement across all
divisions within PBOT.

**9.1.h.** Ensure PBOT decision-making processes are clear,
straightforward, and include mechanisms for public accountability, so
that the public has the capacity to participate.

**9.1.i.** Ensure PBOT public documents are accessible, relevant, and
informative.

**9.1.j.** Ensure public involvement and outreach practices, materials,
and processes are culturally relevant.

**9.1.k.** Follow International Association for Public Participation
(IAP2) Core Values.

**9.1.l.** Follow City of Portland Public Involvement Principles.

**9.1.m.** Follow Internal PBOT Public Involvement Policies.

**9.1.n.** Follow City of Portland Civil Rights Title VI Plan.

**9.1.o.** Follow the goals and policies of Chapter 2: Community
Involvement of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

**9.1.p.** Follow Policy 8.6 Interagency Coordination from Chapter 8:
Public Facilities and Services of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

**9.1.q.** Refer to the Bureau of Planning and Sustainability Public
Engagement Workbook for guidance on scoping for potential community
impacts, identifying stakeholders, determining the right level of
engagement, planning a community engagement process, tracking
engagement, reporting results and evaluating the engagement and process.

**9.1.r.** Consider tools and strategies offered by Metro’s Public
Engagement Guide in Portland’s transportation planning activities.

**9.1.s.** Foster consistency in community engagement approaches and
implementation across the Bureau of Transportation.

**Objective 9.2 Street Classification Descriptions (formerly Objective
6.4)**

**9.2.a.** Classification descriptions and designations are used to
determine the appropriateness of street improvements and to make
recommendations on new and expanding land uses through the land use
review processes.

**9.2.b.** Classification descriptions are used to describe how streets
should function for each mode of travel, not necessarily how they are
functioning at present.

**9.2.c.** All of a street’s classifications must be considered in
designing street improvements and allocating funding. While a proposed
project may serve only one classification, improvements should not
preclude future modifications to accommodate other classifications of
the street.

**9.2.d.** When the existing use of a street does not comply with its
classification, no additional investments should be made that encourage
that inappropriate use.

**9.2.e.** Designate new streets within a land division site as Local
Service Streets for all modes unless otherwise designated through a
concurrent or subsequent Comprehensive Plan amendment to the
Transportation Element.

**9.2.f.** Designate new streets within Pedestrian Districts and Freight
Districts as Local Service Streets unless otherwise designated through a
Comprehensive Plan amendment to the Transportation Element.

**Objective 9.3 Traffic Classification Descriptions (formerly Objective
6.5)**

**9.3.a.** **Regional Trafficways** serve interregional district
movement that has only one trip end in a transportation district or to
serve trips that bypass a district completely.

-   Land Use/Development. Regional Trafficways should serve the Central
    City, regional centers, industrial areas, and intermodal facilities
    and should connect key freight routes within the region to points
    outside the region. Encourage private and public development of
    regional significance to locate adjacent to Regional
    Trafficway interchanges.

-   Connections. Regional Trafficways should connect to other Regional
    Trafficways, Major City Traffic Streets, and District Collectors. A
    ramp that connects to a Regional Trafficway is classified as a
    Regional Trafficway from its point of connection up to its
    intersection with a lower-classified street.

-   Buffering. Adjacent neighborhoods should be buffered from the
    impacts of Regional Trafficways.

-   Dual Classification. A street with dual Regional Trafficway and
    Major City Traffic Street classifications should retain the
    operational characteristics of a Major City Traffic Street and
    respond to adjacent land uses.

**9.3.b.** **Major City Traffic Streets** serve as the principal routes
for traffic that has at least one trip end within a transportation
district.

-   Land Use/Development. Major City Traffic Streets should provide
    motor vehicle connections among the Central City, regional centers,
    town centers, industrial areas, and intermodal facilities.
    Auto-oriented development should locate adjacent to Major City
    Traffic Streets, but should orient to pedestrians along streets also
    classified as Transit Streets or within Pedestrian Districts.

-   Connections. Major City Traffic Streets should serve as primary
    connections to Regional Trafficways and serve major activity centers
    in each district. Traffic with no trip ends within a transportation
    district should be discouraged from using Major City
    Traffic Streets.

-   On-Street Parking. On-street parking may be removed and additional
    right-of-way purchased to provide adequate traffic access when
    consistent with the street design designation of the street.
    Evaluate the need for on-street parking to serve adjacent land uses
    and improve the safety of pedestrians and bicyclists when making
    changes to the roadway.

**9.3.c.** **Traffic Access Streets** provide access to Central City
destinations, distribute traffic within a Central City district, provide
connections between Central City districts, and distribute traffic from
Regional Trafficways and Major City Traffic Streets for access within
the district. Traffic Access Streets are not intended for
through-traffic with no trip ends in the district.

-   Land Use/Development. Traffic Access Streets serve Central City
    land uses. Solutions to congestion problems on Traffic Access
    Streets must accommodate the high-density pattern desired in the
    Central City.

-   Connections. Connections to adjoining transportation districts
    should be to District or Neighborhood Collectors. Intersections of
    Traffic Access Streets and streets with higher or similar
    classifications should be signalized, where warranted, to facilitate
    the safe movement of traffic along each street as well as turning
    movements from one street to the other.

-   Access. Reduction in motor vehicle congestion is given less priority
    than: supporting pedestrian access and enhancing the pedestrian
    environment; maintaining on-street parking to support land uses;
    accommodating transit; or accommodating bicycles. Access to
    off-street parking is allowed.

-   Right-of-way Acquisition. Acquisition of additional right-of-way to
    reduce congestion is discouraged.

**9.3.d.** **District Collectors** serve as distributors of traffic from
Major City Traffic Streets to streets of the same or lower
classification. District Collectors serve trips that both start and end
within a district.

-   Land Use/Development. District Collectors generally connect town
    centers, corridors, main streets, and neighborhoods to nearby
    regional centers and other major destinations. Land uses that
    attract trips from the surrounding neighborhoods or from throughout
    the district should be encouraged to locate on District Collectors.
    Regional attractors of traffic should be discouraged from locating
    on District Collectors.

-   Connections. District Collectors should connect to Major City
    Traffic Streets, other collectors, and local streets and, where
    necessary, to Regional Trafficways.

-   On-Street Parking. Removal of on-street parking and right-of-way
    acquisition should be discouraged on District Collectors, except at
    specific problem locations to accommodate the equally important
    functions of traffic movement and vehicle access to
    abutting properties.

**9.3.e.** **Neighborhood Collectors** serve as distributors of traffic
from Major City Traffic Streets or District Collectors to Local Service
Streets and to serve trips that both start and end within areas bounded
by Major City Traffic Streets and District Collectors.

-   Land Use/Development. Neighborhood Collectors should connect
    neighborhoods to nearby centers, corridors, station communities,
    main streets, and other nearby destinations. New land uses and major
    expansions of land uses that attract a significant volume of traffic
    from outside the neighborhood should be discouraged from locating on
    Neighborhood Collectors.

-   Connections. Neighborhood Collectors should connect to Major City
    Traffic Streets, District Collectors, and other Neighborhood
    Collectors, as well as to Local Service Streets.

-   Function. The design of Neighborhood Collectors may vary over their
    length as the land use character changes from primarily commercial
    to primarily residential. Some Neighborhood Collectors may have a
    regional function, either alone or in concert with other nearby
    parallel collectors. All Neighborhood Collectors should be designed
    to operate as neighborhood streets rather than as
    regional arterials.

-   On-Street Parking. The removal of on-street parking and right-of-way
    acquisition should be discouraged on Neighborhood Collectors.

**9.3.f.** **Local Service Traffic Streets** distribute local traffic
and provide access to local residences or commercial uses.

-   Land Use/Development. Discourage auto-oriented land uses from using
    Local Service Traffic Streets as their primary access.

-   Classification. Streets not classified as Regional Trafficways,
    Major City Traffic Streets, District Collectors, or Neighborhood
    Collectors are classified as Local Service Traffic Streets.

-   Connections. Local Service Traffic Streets should connect
    neighborhoods, provide local circulation, and provide access to
    nearby centers, corridors, station areas, and main streets.

-   Function. Local Service Traffic Streets provide local circulation
    for traffic, pedestrians, and bicyclists and (except in
    special circumstances) should provide on-street parking. In some
    instances, where vehicle speeds and volumes are very low (for
    example, woonerfs and accessways), Local Service Traffic Streets may
    accommodate both vehicles and pedestrians and bicyclists in a
    shared space.

**Objective 9.4 Transit Classification Descriptions (formerly Objective
6.6)**

**9.4.a.** **Regional Transitways** provide for interregional and
interdistrict transit trips with frequent, high speed, high-capacity,
express, or limited service, and to connect the Central City with all
regional centers.

-   Land Use. Development with a regional attraction (e.g., shopping
    centers, arenas) are encouraged to locate adjacent to Regional
    Transitways to reduce traffic impacts on adjoining areas
    and streets. Locate high-density development within a half-mile of
    transit stations on Regional Transitways, with the highest densities
    closest to the stations.

-   Access to Transit. Transit stations should be designed to
    accommodate a high level of multimodal access within a half-mile
    radius of the station. Use feeder bus service to access Regional
    Transit stations. Use park-and-ride facilities to access Regional
    Transit stations only at ends of Regional Transitways or where
    adequate feeder bus service is not feasible.

-   Improvements. Use transit-preferential treatments to facilitate
    light rail and bus operations. Consider the use of access management
    measures to reduce conflicts between transit vehicles and
    other vehicles. Where compatible with adjacent land uses,
    right-of-way acquisition or parking removal may occur to accommodate
    transit-preferential measures and improve access to transit.

-   Transfer Points. Provide safe and convenient transfer points with
    covered waiting areas with transit route information, benches, trash
    receptacles, enhanced signing, lighting, and telephones.

-   Bus Stops. Buses providing local service along Regional Transitways
    should have more frequent stop spacing, similar to stop spacing
    along Major Transit Priority Streets.

-   Dual Classification. A street with a dual Regional Transitway and
    Major Transit Priority Street classifications should retain the
    operational characteristics of a Major Transit Priority Street and
    respond to adjacent land uses.

-   Connections. A ramp that connects to a Regional Transitway is
    classified as a Regional Transitway up to its intersection with a
    lower-classified street.

**9.4.b. Major Transit Priority Streets** provide for high-quality
transit service that connects the Central City and other regional and
town centers and main streets.

-   Land Use. Transit-oriented land uses should be encouraged to locate
    along Major Transit Priority Streets, especially in centers.
    Discourage auto-oriented development from locating on a Major
    Transit Priority Street, except where the street is outside the
    Central City, regional or town center, station community, or main
    street and is also classified as a Major City Traffic Street.
    Support land use densities that vary directly with the existing and
    planned capacity of transit service.

-   Access to Transit. Provide safe and convenient access for
    pedestrians and bicyclists to, across, and along Major Transit
    Priority Streets.

-   Improvements. Employ transit-preferential measures, such as signal
    priority and bypass lanes. Where compatible with adjacent land use
    designations, right-of-way acquisition or parking removal may occur
    to accommodate transit-preferential measures or improve access
    to transit. The use of access management should be considered where
    needed to reduce conflicts between transit vehicles and
    other vehicles.

-   Transfer Points. Provide safe and convenient transfer points with
    covered waiting areas, transit route information, benches, trash
    receptacles, enhanced signing, lighting, and telephones. Limited
    transit service should stop at transfer points and activity centers
    along Major Transit Priority Streets.

-   Dual Classification. Streets with dual Regional Transitway and Major
    Transit Priority Street classifications should retain the
    operational characteristics of Major Transit Priority Streets, and
    development should orient to the street.

-   Bus Stops. Locate bus stops to provide convenient access to
    neighborhoods and commercial centers. Stops should be located
    relatively close together in high-density and medium-density areas,
    including regional and town centers and along most main streets, and
    relatively farther apart in lower-density areas. Passenger amenities
    should include shelters and route information.

**9.4.c. Transit Access Streets** are intended for district-oriented
transit service serving main streets, neighborhoods, and commercial,
industrial, and employment areas.

-   Land Use. Encourage pedestrian- and transit-oriented development in
    commercial, institutional, and mixed-use areas along Transit
    Access Streets.

-   Access to Transit. Provide safe and convenient pedestrian and
    bicycle access to transfer points and stops and along Transit
    Access Streets.

-   Transfer Points. Provide bus shelters, safe and convenient
    pedestrian crossings, and transit information at transfer points.

-   Improvements. Employ transit-preferential measures at specific
    intersections to facilitate bus operations where there are
    significant bus delays. Applicable preferential treatments include
    signal priority, queue jump lanes, and curb extensions.

-   Bus Stops. Locate stops closer together in neighborhood commercial
    areas and somewhat farther apart in other areas along Transit
    Access Streets. Passenger amenities, including covered waiting
    areas, are appropriate along Transit Access Streets.

**9.4.d. Community Transit Streets** serve neighborhoods and industrial
areas and connect to citywide transit service.

-   Land Use. Encourage pedestrian- and transit-oriented development in
    commercial, institutional, and mixed-use areas along Community
    Transit Streets.

-   Transit Service. Community Transit Streets typically carry feeder
    bus service, mini-bus, or demand-responsive services.
    Demand-responsive service may include service that is tailored to
    areas (e.g., industrial areas) that have unusual transit
    service needs. The size and type of transit vehicle should be
    appropriate to the needs of the land uses served.

-   Pedestrian and Bicycle Access. Provide safe and convenient
    pedestrian and bicycle access along Community Transit Streets and to
    transfer points and stops.

-   Improvements. Community Transit Streets are typically used for
    access by bicyclists, pedestrians, and drivers to reach
    neighborhood destinations. Parking removal or the acquisition of
    additional right-of-way should not be undertaken to enhance transit
    service on Community Transit Streets, except at specific locations
    to correct unsafe transit operations or accommodate access
    to transit.

-   Transfer Points. Provide covered waiting areas and transit
    information at transfer points.

-   Bus Stops. Locate stops closer together in neighborhood commercial
    areas and farther apart in other areas along Community
    Transit Streets.

**9.4.e. Local Service Transit Streets** provide transit service to
nearby residents and adjacent commercial areas.

-   Land Use. Transit operations on Local Service Transit Streets should
    give preference to access for individual properties and to the
    specific needs of property owners and residents along the street.

-   Classification. Streets not classified as Regional Transitways,
    Major Transit Priority Streets, Transit Access Streets, or Community
    Transit Streets are classified as Local Service Transit Streets.

-   Function. Local Service Transit Streets may be used for paratransit
    service, end loops for regularly scheduled routes, and may carry
    school buses.

-   Bus Stops. Locate stops along Local Service Transit Streets based on
    Tri-Met service standards.

**9.4.f. Transit Stations** are locations where light rail vehicles or
other high-capacity transit vehicles stop to board and unload
passengers.

-   Locations. Locate Transit Stations on Regional Transitways to
    provide direct and convenient service to regional and town centers
    and major trip generators along the transitway. Station locations
    are conceptual. Actual locations should be used for regulatory
    purposes such as measuring distances.

-   Passenger Facilities. Provide safe and convenient covered waiting
    areas and easy transfer to other transit services. Provide transit
    information and access for pedestrians and bicyclists. Transit
    Stations should have a full range of passenger services, including
    route information, benches, secure bicycle parking, trash
    receptacles, enhanced signing, lighting, and telephones.

-   Transit Station Spacing. Place Transit Stations along Regional
    Transitways with light rail service or other high-capacity transit
    service at intervals of approximately one-half mile. In high-density
    areas in the Central City, consider closer station spacing of three
    to four blocks.

**9.4.g. Intercity Passenger Rail** provides commuter and other rail
passenger service.

-   Station Spacing. Stations are typically located one or more miles
    apart, depending on overall route length.

**9.4.h. Passenger Intermodal Facilities** serve as the hub for various
passenger modes and the transfer point between modes.

-   Connections. Passenger Intermodal Facilities connect inter-urban
    passenger service with urban public transportation service and are
    highly accessible by all modes.

**Objective 9.5 Bicycle Classification Descriptions (formerly Objective
6.7)\
**

**9.5.a. Major City Bikeways** form the backbone of the city’s bikeway
network and are intended to serve high volumes of bicycle traffic and
provide direct, seamless, efficient travel across and between
transportation districts.

-   Land Use. Major City Bikeways should support 2040 land use types.

-   Improvements. Major City Bikeways should be designed to accommodate
    large volumes of bicyclists, to maximize their comfort and to
    minimize delays by emphasizing the movement of bicycles. Build the
    highest quality bikeway facilities. Motor vehicle lanes and
    on-street parking may be removed on Major City Bikeways to provide
    needed width for separated-in-roadway facilities where compatible
    with adjacent land uses and only after performing careful analysis
    to determine potential impacts to the essential movement of
    all modes. Where improvements to the bicycling environment are
    needed but the ability to reallocate road space is limited, consider
    alternative approaches that include property acquisition, or
    dedication, parallel routes and/or less desirable facilities. On
    Major City Bikeways developed as shared roadways, use all
    appropriate tools to achieve recommended performance guidelines.
    Where conditions warrant and where practical, Major City Bikeways
    should have separated facilities for bicycles and pedestrians.

**9.5.b. City Bikeways** establish direct and convenient bicycle access
to significant destinations, to provide convenient access to Major City
Bikeways and to provide coverage within three city blocks of any given
point.

-   Land Use. City Bikeways should support 2040 land use types and
    residential neighborhoods.

-   Improvements. City Bikeways emphasize the movement of bicycles.
    Build the highest quality\
    bikeway facilities. Motor vehicle lanes and on-street parking may be
    removed on City Bikeways to provide needed width for
    separated-in-roadway facilities where compatible with adjacent land
    uses and only after taking into consideration the essential movement
    of all modes. Where improvements to the bicycling environment are
    needed but the ability to reallocate road space is limited, consider
    alternative approaches that include property acquisition, or
    dedication, parallel routes and/or less desirable facilities. On
    City Bikeways developed as shared roadways, use all appropriate
    tools to achieve recommended performance guidelines.

**9.5.c. Local Service Bikeways** serve local circulation needs for
bicyclists and provide access to adjacent properties.

-   Classification. All streets not classified as City Bikeways or Major
    City Bikeways with the exception of Regional Trafficways not also
    classified as Major City Traffic Streets, are classified as Local
    Service Bikeways.

-   Improvements. Consider the following design treatments for Local
    Service Bikeways: shared roadways, traffic calming, bicycle lanes,
    and extra-wide curb lanes. Crossings of Local Service Bikeways with
    other rights-of-way should minimize conflicts.

-   On-Street Parking. On-street parking on Local Service Bikeways
    should not be removed to provide bicycle lanes.

-   Operation. Treatment of Local Service Bikeways should not have a
    side effect of creating, accommodating, or encouraging
    automobile through-traffic.

**9.5.d. Bicycle Districts** are areas with a dense concentration of
commercial, cultural, institutional and/or recreational destinations
where the City intends to make bicycle travel more attractive than
driving.

-   Land Use. High density and mixed-use neighborhoods should be
    targeted as bicycle districts. Auto-oriented development should be
    discouraged in Bicycle Districts.

-   Characteristics. The size and configuration of a Bicycle District
    should be consistent with the scale of bicycling trips. A Bicycle
    District includes the streets along its boundaries, except where the
    abutting street is classified as a Regional Trafficway.

-   Improvements. All streets within a Bicycle District are important in
    serving bicycle trips. Appropriate bicycle facilities should be
    determined for each street based on the desired bicycling conditions
    and operations. Use the bikeway design and engineering guidelines to
    design streets within Bicycle Districts.

**Objective 9.6 Pedestrian Classification Descriptions (formerly
Objective 6.8)**

**9.6.a. Pedestrian Districts** give priority to pedestrian access in
areas where high levels of pedestrian activity exist or are planned,
including the Central City, Gateway regional center, town centers, and
station communities.

-   Land Use. Zoning should allow a transit-supportive density of
    residential and commercial uses that support lively and intensive
    pedestrian activity. Auto-oriented development should be discouraged
    in Pedestrian Districts. Institutional campuses that generate high
    levels of pedestrian activity may be included in
    Pedestrian Districts. Exceptions to the density and zoning criteria
    may be appropriate in some designated historic districts with a
    strong pedestrian orientation.

-   Streets within a District. Make walking the mode of choice for all
    trips within a Pedestrian District. All streets within a Pedestrian
    District are equal in importance in serving pedestrian trips and
    should have sidewalks on both sides.

-   Characteristics. The size and configuration of a Pedestrian District
    should be consistent with the scale of walking trips. A Pedestrian
    District includes both sides of the streets along its boundaries,
    except where the abutting street is classified as a
    Regional Trafficway. In these instances, the land up to the Regional
    Trafficway is considered part of the Pedestrian District, but the
    Regional Trafficway itself is not.

-   Access to Transit. A Pedestrian District should have, or be planned
    to have, frequent transit service and convenient access to
    transit stops.

-   Improvements. Use the Pedestrian Design Guide to design streets
    within Pedestrian Districts. Improvements may include widened
    sidewalks, curb extensions, street lighting, street trees,
    and signing. Where two arterials cross, design treatments such as
    curb extensions, median pedestrian refuges, marked crosswalks, and
    traffic signals should be considered to minimize the crossing
    distance, direct pedestrians across the safest route, and provide
    safe gaps in the traffic stream.

**9.6.b. Pedestrian-Transit Streets** create a strong and visible
relationship between pedestrians and transit within the Central City.

-   Land Use. Pedestrian-Transit Streets respond to significant public
    investments in public transportation, including light rail, the
    transit mall, and streetcar, and enhance the pedestrian environment
    adjacent to high-density land uses.

-   Improvements. Improvements should include wide sidewalks to
    accommodate high levels of pedestrian traffic, urban design features
    that promote pedestrian activity, and visual signals to motor
    vehicles to recognize the priority of pedestrian and
    transit vehicles.

**9.6.c. City Walkways** provide safe, convenient, and attractive
pedestrian access to activities along major streets and to recreation
and institutions; provide connections between neighborhoods; and provide
access to transit.

-   Land Use. City Walkways should serve areas with dense zoning,
    commercial areas, and major destinations. Where auto-oriented land
    uses are allowed on City Walkways, site development standards should
    address the needs of pedestrians for access.

-   Improvements. Use the Pedestrian Design Guide to design
    City Walkways. Consider special design treatment for City Walkways
    that are also designated as Regional or Community Main Streets.

**9.6.d. Off-Street Paths** serve recreational and other walking trips.

-   Function. Use Off-Street Paths as short cuts to link urban
    destinations and origins along continuous greenbelts such as rivers,
    park and forest areas, and other scenic corridors, and used as
    elements of a regional, citywide, or community recreational
    trail plan.

-   Location. Establish Off-Street Paths in corridors not well served by
    the street system. On existing rights-of-way that are not developed
    or likely to be developed in the near future, Off-Street Paths may
    be designated where needed to complete the pedestrian system.

-   Improvements. Use the Pedestrian Design Guide to design
    Off-Street Paths. Design Off-Street Paths as separated facilities
    that accommodate pedestrians and may accommodate other
    non-motorized vehicles.

**9.6.e Local Service Walkways** serve local circulation needs for
pedestrians and provide safe and convenient access to local
destinations, including safe routes to schools.

-   Land Use. Local Service Walkways are usually located in residential,
    commercial, or industrial areas on Local Service Traffic Streets.

-   Classification. All streets not classified as City Walkways or
    Off-Street Paths, with the exception of Regional Trafficways not
    also classified as Major City Traffic Streets, are classified as
    Local Service Walkways.

-   Improvements. Use the Pedestrian Design Guide to design Local
    Service Walkways.

**Objective 9.7 Freight Classification Descriptions (formerly Objective
6.9)**

**9.7.a. Freight Districts** provide safe and convenient truck mobility
and access in industrial and employment areas serving high levels of
truck traffic and to accommodate the needs of intermodal freight
movement.

-   Land Use. Support locating industrial and employment land uses that
    rely on multimodal freight movement in Freight Districts.

-   Function. Freight District streets provide local truck access and
    circulation to industrial and employment land uses.

-   Connections. In Freight Districts, streets not classified as
    Regional Truckways or Priority Truck Streets are classified as
    Freight District streets. Freight Districts connect individual
    properties to Priority Truck Streets.

-   Design. Freight District streets should be designed to facilitate
    the movement of all truck types and over-dimensional loads,
    as practicable.

**9.7.b. Regional Truckways** facilitate interregional and movement of
freight.

-   Land Use. Support locating industrial and employment land uses with
    high levels of truck activity near Regional Truckway interchanges.

-   Function. Provide for safe and efficient continuous-flow operation
    for trucks.

-   Connections. Provide Regional Truckway interchanges that directly
    serve Freight districts and connect to Priority Truck Streets and
    other streets with high levels of truck activity. A ramp that
    connects to a Regional Truck Street is classified as a Regional
    Truck Street up to its intersection with a lower-classified street.

-   Design. Design Regional Truckways to be limited access facilities
    and to standards that facilitate the movement of all types
    of trucks.

**9.7.c. Priority Truck Streets** serve as the primary route for access
and circulation in Freight Districts, and between Freight Districts and
Regional Truckways.

-   Land Use. Support locating industrial and employment uses that
    generate high truck activity on corridors served by Priority
    Truck Streets.

-   Function. Priority Truck Streets accommodate high truck volumes and
    provide high-quality mobility and access.

-   Connections. Priority Truck Streets connect Freight Districts to
    Regional Truckways.

-   Design. Priority Truck Streets should be designed to facilitate the
    movement of all truck classes and over-dimensional loads,
    as practicable. Buffer adjacent residential uses from noise impacts,
    where warranted.

**9.7.d. Major Truck Streets** serve as principal routes for trucks in a
Transportation District.

-   Land Use. Commercial and employment land uses that generate high
    levels of truck activity should locate along Major Truck Streets.

-   Function. Major Truck Streets provide truck mobility within a
    Transportation District and access to commercial and employment uses
    along the corridor.

-   Connections Major Truck Streets connect Transportation
    district-level truck trips to Regional Truckways. Trucks with no
    trip ends within a Transportation District should be discouraged
    from using Major Truck Streets.

-   Design. Major Truck Streets should accommodate all truck types,
    as practicable.

**9.7.e.** **Truck Access Streets** serve as access and circulation
routes for delivery of goods and\
services to neighborhood-serving commercial and employment uses.

-   Land Use. Support locating commercial land uses that generate lower
    volumes of truck trips on Truck Access Streets.

-   Function. Truck Access Streets provide access and circulation to
    land uses within a Transportation District. Non-local truck trips
    are discouraged from using Truck Access Streets.

-   Connections. Truck Access Streets should distribute truck trips from
    Major Truck Streets to neighborhood-serving destinations.

-   Design. Design Truck Access Streets to accommodate truck needs in
    balance with other modal needs of the street.

**9.7.f. Local Service Truck Streets** serve local truck circulation and
access.

-   Land Use. Local Service Truck Streets provide for goods and service
    delivery to individual commercial, employment, and residential
    locations outside of Freight Districts.

-   Function. Local Service Truck Streets should provide local truck
    access and circulation only.

-   Connections. All streets, outside of Freight Districts, not
    classified as Regional Truckways, Priority Truck Streets, Major
    Truck Streets, or Truck Access Streets are classified as Local
    Service Truck Streets. Local Service Truck Streets with a higher
    Traffic classification are the preferred routes for local access
    and circulation.

-   Design. Local Service Truck Streets should give preference to
    accessing individual properties and the specific needs of property
    owners and residents along the street. Use of restrictive signage
    and operational accommodation are appropriate for Local Service
    Truck Streets.

**9.7.g. Railroad Main Lines** transport freight cargo and passengers
over long distances as part of a railway network.

**9.7.h. Railroad Branch Lines** transport freight cargo over short
distances on local rail lines that are not part of a rail network and
distribute cargo to and from mail line railroads.

**9.7.i. Freight Facilities** include the major shipping and marine,
air, rail, and pipeline terminals that facilitate the local, national,
and international movement of freight.

**Objective 9.8 Emergency Response Classification Descriptions (formerly
Objective 6.10)**

**9.8.a.** **Major Emergency Response Streets** serve primarily the
longer, most direct legs of emergency response trips.

-   Improvements. Design treatments on Major Emergency Response Streets
    should enhance mobility for emergency response vehicles by employing
    preferential or priority treatments.

-   Traffic Slowing. Major Emergency Response Routes are not eligible
    for traffic slowing devices in the future. Existing traffic slowing
    devices may remain and be replaced if necessary.

**9.8.b.** **Minor Emergency Response Streets** serve primarily the
shorter legs of emergency response trips.

-   Classification. All streets not classified as Major Emergency
    Response Streets are classified as Minor Emergency Response Streets.

-   Improvements. Design and operate Minor Emergency Response Streets to
    allow access to individual properties by emergency response
    vehicles, but maintain livability on the street.

-   Traffic Slowing. Minor Emergency Response Streets are eligible for
    traffic slowing devices.

**Objective 9.9 Street Design Classification Descriptions (formerly
Objective 6.11)**

Street Design Classification Descriptions provide general design
guidance based on the current and planned land use context around the
street. Whenever possible, a “complete streets” approach should be taken
during street design to accommodate all necessary modes and functions,
taking into account the modal classifications. Where right-of-way is
limited and tradeoffs must be made, refer to the modal street
classifications as well as Policy 9.6 (Transportation strategy for
people movement) to help guide decision-making regarding allocation of
right-of-way. If one or more modes are still unable to be accommodated
in the available right-of-way, a “complete networks” approach should be
used to ensure that those modes are still accommodated on parallel
routes as a part of project design.

**9.9.a. Civic Main Streets** serve people throughout the City and are
designed to emphasize multimodal access to major activity centers.

-   Land Use. Civic Main Streets are segments of Civic Corridors located
    within the Central City, Regional Centers, Town Centers,
    Neighborhood Centers, and other areas of intensive
    commercial activity. Development consists of a mix of uses that are
    oriented to the street.

-   Lanes. Civic Main Streets typically include two to four vehicle
    lanes, with additional turning lanes as needed. Lanes may be
    dedicated as transit-only or business-access-transit lanes if needed
    to improve transit speed and reliability.

-   Width. Civic Main Streets generally feature a wider right-of-way
    than Neighborhood Main Streets and are more often able to provide
    the desired space for each mode and function.

-   Function. Civic Main Streets should emphasize pedestrian access to
    adjacent land uses while also accommodating access and mobility for
    other modes.

-   Curb zone. The curb zone along Civic Main Streets should emphasize
    access and place-making functions (such as parking, loading, transit
    stops, street trees, curb extensions, and street seats) to support
    adjacent land use and improve the pedestrian realm. The curb zone
    may be used for mobility functions if space is needed to provide
    bicycle facilities or provide turn lanes near intersections.

-   Separation. Civic Main Streets have frequent street connections and
    support multimodal access to destinations. Sidewalks should be
    provided, and pedestrian and bicycle crossings should be signalized
    or improved with median refuge islands or curb extensions as needed
    to provide safety and comfort. Bicycle facilities should be
    separated from motor vehicle traffic.

-   Design Elements. Civic Main Street design should typically include
    the following: wide sidewalks with a through pedestrian zone, a
    furnishing zone, and a frontage zone; closely-spaced pedestrian
    crossings; separated bicycle facilities; way-finding; transit
    priority treatments as needed; vehicle lanes; low vehicle speeds;
    medians and/or turn lanes as needed; and limited driveway access.

-   Design Treatment. During improvement projects, the preservation of
    existing vegetation, topography, vistas and viewpoints, driver
    perception, street lighting, and sight distance requirements should
    be considered.

-   Utilities. Consider undergrounding or reducing the visual impact of
    overhead utilities along Civic Main Streets.

**9.9.b. Neighborhood Main Streets** primarily serve surrounding
neighborhoods and are designed to emphasize multimodal access to
activity centers.

-   Land Use. Neighborhood Main Streets are segments of Neighborhood
    Corridors located within the Central City, Regional Centers, Town
    Centers, Neighborhood Centers, and other areas of intensive
    commercial activity. Development consists of a mix of uses oriented
    to the street.

-   Lanes. Neighborhood Main Streets typically include two vehicle lanes
    with additional turning lanes as needed.

-   Width. Neighborhood Main Streets generally feature a narrower
    right-of-way than Civic Main Streets and may not be able to
    accommodate the full desired space for each mode.

-   Function. Neighborhood Main Streets should emphasize pedestrian
    access to adjacent land uses while also accommodating access and
    mobility for other modes.

-   Curb zone. The curb zone along Neighborhood Main Streets should
    emphasize access and place-making functions (such as parking,
    loading, transit stops, street trees, curb extensions, and
    street seats) as needed to support adjacent land use and improve the
    pedestrian realm. The curb zone may be used for mobility functions
    if space is needed to provide bicycle facilities or provide turn
    lanes near intersections.

-   Separation. Neighborhood Main Streets have frequent street
    connections and support multimodal access to destinations. Sidewalks
    should be provided and pedestrian and bicycle crossings should be
    signalized or improved with median refuge islands or curb extensions
    as needed to provide safety and comfort. Bicycle facilities should
    generally be separated from motor vehicle traffic, though shared
    roadway facilities may be acceptable if traffic volumes and speeds
    are sufficiently low.

-   Design Elements. Neighborhood Main Street design should typically
    include the following: wide sidewalks with a through pedestrian
    zone, a furnishing zone, and a frontage zone; closely-spaced
    pedestrian crossings; separated bicycle facilities; way-finding;
    transit priority treatments as needed; vehicle lanes; low vehicle
    speeds; medians and/or turn lanes as needed; and limited
    driveway access.

-   Design Treatment. During improvement projects, the preservation of
    existing vegetation, topography, vistas and viewpoints, driver
    perception, street lighting, and sight distance requirements should
    be considered.

-   Utilities. Consider undergrounding or reducing the visual impact of
    overhead utilities along Neighborhood Main Streets.

**9.9.c. Civic** **Corridors** serve people throughout the City and are
designed to emphasize multimodal mobility between major activity
centers.

-   Land Use. Civic Corridors are located primarily along major transit
    corridors and between Civic Main Street segments, connecting the
    Central City, Regional Centers, Town Centers, and
    Neighborhood Centers. Development consists of a mix of uses that are
    oriented to the street.

-   Lanes. Civic Corridors typically include two to four vehicle lanes,
    with additional turning lanes as needed. Lanes may be dedicated as
    transit-only or business-access-transit lanes if needed to improve
    transit speed and reliability.

-   Width. Civic Corridors generally feature a wider right-of-way than
    Neighborhood Corridors and are more often able to provide the
    desired space for each mode and function.

-   Function. Civic Corridors emphasize mobility for all modes between
    major activity centers while also accommodating access to adjacent
    land uses along the corridor.

-   Curb zone. The curb zone along Civic Corridors should typically
    emphasize mobility functions such as bicycle facilities or turn
    lanes near intersections. The curb zone may be used for access
    functions such as parking and loading if needed to support adjacent
    land use.

-   Separation. Civic Corridors have frequent street connections.
    Sidewalks should be provided and pedestrian and bicycle crossings
    should be signalized or improved with median refuge islands or curb
    extensions as needed to provide safety and comfort. Bicycle
    facilities should be separated from motor vehicle traffic.

-   Design Elements. Civic Corridor design should typically include the
    following: wide sidewalks with a through pedestrian zone, a
    furnishing zone, and a frontage zone; closely-spaced pedestrian
    crossings; separated bicycle facilities; way-finding; transit
    priority treatments as needed; vehicle lanes; low to moderate
    speeds; and medians and/or turn lanes as needed.

**9.9.d. Neighborhood** **Corridors** primarily serve surrounding
neighborhoods and are designed to emphasize multimodal mobility between
activity centers.

-   Land Use. Neighborhood Corridors are primarily located along transit
    corridors and between segments of Neighborhood Main Streets,
    connecting the Central City, Regional Centers, Town Centers, and
    Neighborhood Centers. Development consists of a mix of uses that are
    oriented to the street.

-   Lanes. Neighborhood Corridors typically include two vehicle lanes
    with additional turning lanes as needed.

-   Width. Neighborhood Corridors generally feature a narrower
    right-of-way than Civic Corridors and may not be able to accommodate
    the full desired space for each mode.

-   Function. Neighborhood Corridors emphasize mobility for all modes
    between activity centers while also accommodating access to adjacent
    land uses along the corridor.

-   Curb zone. The curb zone along Neighborhood Corridors should
    emphasize mobility functions such as bicycle facilities or turn
    lanes near intersections. The curb zone may be used for access
    functions such as parking and loading if needed to support adjacent
    land use.

-   Separation. Neighborhood Corridors have frequent street connections.
    Sidewalks should be provided and pedestrian and bicycle crossings
    should be signalized or improved with median refuge islands or curb
    extensions as needed to provide safety and comfort. Bicycle
    facilities should be separated from motor vehicle traffic, though
    shared roadway bicycle facilities may be acceptable if traffic
    volumes and speeds are sufficiently low.

-   Design Elements. Neighborhood Corridor design should typically
    include the following: wide sidewalks with a through pedestrian
    zone, a furnishing zone, and a frontage zone; closely-spaced
    pedestrian crossings; separated bicycle facilities; way-finding;
    transit priority treatments as needed; vehicle lanes; low to
    moderate speeds; and medians and/or turn lanes as needed.

**9.9.e. Regional Corridors** serve people throughout the City and are
designed to emphasize multimodal mobility between cities in the region.

-   Land Use. Regional Corridors connect Regional, Town, and
    Neighborhood Centers to other cities in the region.

-   Lanes. Regional Corridors usually include two to four vehicle lanes.
    They occasionally have additional lanes in some situations, such as
    to allow turning movements. Lanes may be dedicated as transit-only
    or business-access-transit lanes if needed to improve transit speed
    and reliability.

-   Width. Regional Corridors generally feature a wider right-of-way
    than Community Corridors and are more often able to provide the full
    desired space for each mode.

-   Function. Regional Corridors emphasize mobility for all modes
    between cities while also accommodating access to adjacent land uses
    along the corridor.

-   Curb zone. The curb zone along Regional Corridors should emphasize
    mobility functions such as bicycle facilities or turn lanes
    near intersections. The curb zone may be used for access functions
    such as parking and loading if needed to support adjacent land use.

-   Separation. Regional Corridors can have moderately spaced
    street connections. Sidewalks should be provided and pedestrian and
    bicycle crossings should be signalized or improved with median
    refuge islands or curb extensions as needed to provide safety
    and comfort. Bicycle facilities should be separated from motor
    vehicle traffic.

-   Design Elements. Regional Corridor design should typically include
    the following: sidewalks; pedestrian crossings where needed to serve
    transit stops or destinations; separated bicycle facilities;
    way-finding; transit priority treatments as needed; vehicle lanes;
    and medians and/or turn lanes as needed.

**9.9.f. Community Corridors** primarily serve surrounding neighborhoods
and are designed to emphasize multimodal mobility between neighborhoods.

-   Land Use. Community Corridors connect Regional, Town, and
    Neighborhood Centers to surrounding neighborhoods.

-   Lanes. Lanes may be dedicated as transit-only or
    business-access-transit lanes if needed to improve transit speed
    and reliability.

-   Width. Community Corridors generally feature a narrower right-of-way
    than Regional Corridors and may not be able to accommodate the full
    desired space for each mode.

-   Function. Community Corridors emphasize mobility for all modes
    between neighborhoods while also accommodating access to adjacent
    land uses along the corridor.

-   Curb zone. The curb zone along Community Corridors should emphasize
    mobility functions such as bicycle facilities or turn lanes
    near intersections. The curb zone may be used for access functions
    such as parking and loading if needed to support adjacent land use.

-   Separation. Community Corridors have closely spaced
    street connections. Sidewalks should be provided and pedestrian and
    bicycle crossings should be signalized or improved with median
    refuge islands or curb extensions as needed to provide safety
    and comfort. Bicycle facilities should be separated from motor
    vehicle traffic, though shared roadway bicycle facilities may be
    acceptable if traffic volumes and speeds are sufficiently low.

-   Design Elements. Community Corridor design should typically include
    the following: sidewalks; pedestrian crossings where needed to serve
    transit stops or destinations; separated bicycle facilities;
    way-finding; transit priority treatments as needed; vehicle lanes;
    and medians and/or turn lanes as needed.

**9.9.g. Urban Throughways** are designed to emphasize long-distance
mobility for motor vehicle, freight, and transit trips throughout the
region.

-   Land Use. Urban Throughways connect major activity centers,
    industrial areas, and intermodal facilities. Adjacent land uses
    sometimes orient directly to Urban Throughways.

-   Number of Lanes. Urban Throughways usually have four to six vehicle
    lanes, with additional lanes in some situations. Dedicated
    high-occupancy-vehicle, freight-only, or transit-only lanes may be
    provided to support more efficient use of Urban Throughways.

-   Function. Urban Throughways primarily serve a mobility function,
    with little or no local access provided along the street.

-   Separation. Urban Throughways may be completely divided, with no
    left turns, or they may be mostly divided, with limited
    opportunities for left turns. Street connections may occur at
    separated grades, with access controlled by ramps, or there may be
    limited street connections at grade. If designed as a
    grade-separated freeway, pedestrian and bicycle crossings should be
    provided on overpasses or underpasses, and pedestrian and bicycle
    facilities along the corridor should be provided on
    parallel pathways. If designed as a limited-access highway or
    expressway, pedestrian and bicycle crossings should be either
    grade-separated or signalized, and pedestrian and bicycle facilities
    should be separated from motor vehicle traffic.

-   Design Elements. Urban Throughway design typically includes vehicle
    lanes, grade-separated or signalized pedestrian and bicycle,
    parallel pathways or separated facilities for pedestrian and bicycle
    travel, clear sightlines, median barriers, shoulders, and motor
    vehicle lane widths that accommodate freight movement. Where
    appropriate, transit priority treatments should be used to enhance
    transit speed and reliability. Encourage the Oregon Department of
    Transportation to maintain a continuous landscape along Urban
    Throughways that reduces the visual impacts of the throughway on
    motorists and adjacent land uses.

-   Connections. A ramp that connects to an Urban Throughway is
    classified as an Urban Throughway up to its intersection with a
    differently-classified street. An interchange between an Urban
    Throughway and a differently-classified street should be designed to
    safely accommodate all modes and provide the least possible
    disruption to the surrounding modal networks. Connections should be
    provided across Urban Throughways at closely-spaced intervals to
    provide greater street connectivity.

**9.9.h. Industrial Roads** are designed to emphasize freight mobility
while also accommodating other modes and providing local access.

-   Land Use. Industrial Roads typically serve industrial areas and
    freight intermodal sites, with a significant percentage of trips
    being made by trucks. Adjacent land uses sometimes orient to the
    Industrial Road.

-   Number of Lanes. Industrial Road design typically includes two to
    four vehicle lanes, with additional turning lanes as needed.
    Dedicated freight-only lanes or turn pockets may be provided as
    needed to support roadway efficiency.

-   Function. Industrial Roads emphasize freight mobility while
    accommodating other modes and providing access to industrial sites
    and freight districts.

-   Curb zone. The curb zone along Industrial Roads primarily serves
    mobility functions such as vehicle lanes or bike lanes. The curb
    zone may be used for access functions such as parking and loading at
    limited locations if needed to support adjacent land use.

-   Separation. Industrial Roads have limited street connections that
    may occur at the same grade or separate grades. Pedestrian and
    bicycle crossings should be grade-separated or signalized, and
    pedestrian and bicycle facilities should be separated from motor
    vehicle traffic.

-   Design Elements. Industrial Road design typically includes vehicle
    lanes, medians or center turn lanes where needed, limited driveway
    access, pullouts for bus stops, transit priority treatments,
    separated pedestrian and bicycle facilities, and improved pedestrian
    crossings located on overpasses, underpasses, or signalized
    at-grade intersections. Industrial Roads may also include design
    treatments that improve freight mobility, such as freight-only
    lanes, freight signal priority, and a wider turning radius
    at intersections.

**9.9.i. Enhanced Greenway Corridors** are designed to provide a network
of scenic low-stress connections that prioritize walking and/or
bicycling and often include natural features as well as innovative urban
design and place-making elements.

-   Dual Classification. Streets may have an Enhanced Greenway Corridor
    classification in addition to another street design classification.
    When developing or retrofitting these streets, incorporate Enhanced
    Greenway Corridor design elements within the corridor.

-   Land Use. Enhanced Greenway Corridors connect parks, open spaces,
    and singular attractions throughout the City to each other and to
    surrounding neighborhoods via a network of scenic and low-stress
    walking and/or bicycling routes. They can run through a variety of
    different land use contexts, including residential neighborhoods,
    natural areas, industrial areas, and employment centers.

-   Design Elements. Enhanced Greenway Corridor design can take many
    forms, and should use flexible design treatments appropriate to
    adjacent land use context. Design elements may include: neighborhood
    greenways; traffic calming; motor vehicle diversion; multi-use
    paths; wide sidewalks; boardwalks; trails; separated bikeways;
    broad-canopy trees and landscaping; scenic views; stormwater
    management; underground utilities; special lighting;
    and way-finding. Where appropriate, pedestrian and bicycle routes
    may use separate parallel routes or streets along a corridor.

**9.9.j. Greenscape Streets**

Greenscape Street designs are applied to arterials where natural or
informal landscapes dominate the adjacent areas and the right-of-way,
such as lower-density residential areas in wooded settings.

-   Dual Classifications. Where streets have a Greenscape Street design
    designation and another street design designation, consider the
    natural characteristics of the street during the design and
    implementation of street improvements.

-   Design Treatment. During improvement projects, consider the use of
    vegetated stormwater treatment techniques; minimizing impervious
    surfaces; preservation of existing vegetation, topography, vistas
    and viewpoints, driver perception, street lighting, and sight
    distance requirements. Vegetation may be landscaped or native,
    depending on the existing and desired character.

**9.9.k. Local Streets** are designed to complement planned land uses
and reduce dependence on arterials for local circulation.

-   Land Use. Local Streets are multimodal, but are not intended for
    trucks (other than local deliveries) in residential areas. Local
    Streets are important for local circulation of trucks in commercial
    and industrial areas.

-   Design. Local Street design typically includes frequent street
    connections, sidewalks, on-street parking, stormwater facilities,
    and planting of street trees and ground covers (where planting
    strips are included). A shared street design without sidewalks may
    be appropriate where traffic volumes are sufficiently low.

-   Classification. All streets not classified as Urban Throughways,
    Urban Highways, Industrial Roads, Civic Main Streets, Neighborhood
    Main Streets, Civic Corridors, Neighborhood Corridors, Regional
    Corridors, or Community Corridors are classified as Local Streets
    for street design.

**Objective 9.10 Pedestrian Transportation (formerly Objective 6.22) **

**9.10.a.** Support walking to transit by giving priority to the
completion of the pedestrian network that serves Comp Plan Centers and
Corridors, transit centers, stations, and stops; providing adequate
spacing and quality of crossing opportunities at transit stops; and
planning and designing pedestrian improvements that allow adequate space
for transit stop facilities.

**9.10.b.** Improve the quality of the pedestrian environment by
implementing pedestrian design guidelines to ensure that all
construction in the right-of-way meets a pedestrian quality standard and
by developing special design districts for Pedestrian Districts and main
streets.

**9.10.c.** Increase pedestrian safety and convenience by identifying
and analyzing high pedestrian collision locations; making physical
improvements, such as traffic calming, signal improvements, and crossing
improvements in areas of high pedestrian use; and supporting changes to
adopted statutes and codes that would enhance pedestrian safety.

**9.10.d.** Develop a citywide network of pedestrian trails that
increases pedestrian access for recreation and transportation purposes
and links to schools, parks, transit, and shopping as well as to the
regional trail system and adjacent cities.

**Objective 9.11 Bicycle Transportation** ***(formerly Objective 6.23)**
*

**9.11.a.** Form a citywide network of connected bikeways on streets
including streets with low traffic speeds and low traffic volumes.
Provide the highest degree of separation on busier streets to preserve
access to common destinations. Accommodate cyclists of all ages and
abilities.

**9.11.b.** Provide continuous bicycle facilities and eliminate gaps in
the bikeway network.

**9.11.c.** Install bicycle signage along bikeways where needed to
define the route and/or direct bicyclists to a destination or other
bikeway.

**9.11.d.** Design bicycle facilities with safety and comfort as basic
requirements to attract riders of all ages and skill levels.

**9.11.e.** Ensure that the health, social, economic, and environmental
benefits of bicycling are accessible to all Portlanders regardless of
race, ethnicity, age, economic status, geographical location or language
spoken.

**9.11.f.** Encourage the provision of showers and changing facilities
for commuting cyclists, including the development of such facilities in
commercial buildings and at central locations.

**9.11.g.** Increase the number of multi-modal trips that include
bicycling for at least one trip segment by improving and simplifying
connections and transfers to transit.

**9.11.h.** Promote bicycling as safe and convenient transportation to
and from school.

**9.11.i.** Provide bikeway system improvements that will serve key
destinations, such as Metro 2040 centers and main streets, employment
centers, commercial districts, transit stations, institutions, schools,
and recreational destinations.

**9.11.j.** Support bike-sharing programs aimed at residents, employees,
and visitors to increase access to bicycles and to provide last-mile
connections from transit.

**9.11.k.** Maintain Portland’s position as a national leader in the
evaluation of bicycle improvements and ridership through on-going data
collection and monitoring of changes to bicycling infrastructure and in
riding behavior.

**9.11.l.** Support changes to remove institutional barriers in
statutes, policies, and codes that discourage safe and efficient bicycle
use.

**Objective 9.12** **Public Transportation *(formerly Objective 6.24)***

**9.12.a.** Support light rail transit and bus connections as the
foundation of the regional transit system, with completion of the system
to connect all regional centers, downtown Vancouver, major attractions,
and intermodal passenger facilities as a high priority for the region.

**9.12.b.** Base decisions about light rail transitway alignments and
their connections to other regional facilities on individual corridor
studies.

**9.12.c.** Expand primary and secondary bus service to meet the growing
demand for work and non-work trips, operate as the principal transit
service for access and mobility needs, help reduce congestion, and
support the economic activities of the City.

**9.12.d.** Implement transit-preferential measures on Major Transit
Priority Streets to achieve travel times competitive with the automobile
and to improve service reliability.

**9.12.e.** Consider the use of alternative forms of transit, including
vanpools and dial-a-ride in low-density areas and other forms of transit
such as water taxis.

**9.12.f.** Support a public transit system and regional transportation
strategies that address the special needs of the transportation
disadvantaged and provide increased mobility options and access.

**9.12.g.** Locate major park-and-ride lots only where transit ridership
is increased significantly, vehicle miles traveled are reduced,
transit-supportive development is not hampered, bus service is not
available or is inadequate, and the surrounding area is not negatively
impacted.

**9.12.h** Develop streetcar lines in Portland to connect new or
redeveloping neighborhoods to employment opportunities and other
destinations, including shopping, education, and recreation.

**Objective 9.13 Transit-Oriented Development (formerly Objective
6.19)**

**9.13.a.** Consider the existing or planned availability of
high-quality transit service when adopting more intensive residential,
commercial, and employment designations.

**9.13.b.** Focus medium-density and high-density development, including
institutions, in transit-oriented developments along transit lines.

**9.13.c.** Require commercial and multifamily development to orient to
and provide pedestrian and bicycle connections to transit streets and,
for major developments, provide transit facilities on a site or adjacent
to a transit stop.

**9.13.d.** Examine the benefits of limiting drive-through facilities in
existing or planned areas of high-intensity development and high levels
of pedestrian, bicycle, and transit activity when planning studies are
being done for these areas.

**Objective 9.14** **Truck Mobility** ***(formerly Objective 6.30)***

**9.14.a.** Prioritize transportation investments in the freight street
network that improve connections between Freight Districts and Regional
Truckways.

**9.14.b.** Accommodate truck travel on designated truck streets through
improvements to facility design and operations that address the
dimensional needs of trucks.

**9.14.c.** Encourage through-truck traffic to use Regional Truckways,
Priority Truck Streets, and Major Truck Streets for mobility and Truck
Access Streets and Local Service Truck Streets to access local
destinations.

**9.14.d.** Develop and implement street connectivity plans for Freight
Districts to improve truck circulation and access to industrial land
uses.

**9.14.e.** Develop and implement a signage plan for designated truck
routes and major freight destinations.

**9.14.f.** Designate and maintain preferred routes to accommodate
over-dimensional freight movement.

**9.14.g.** Employ intelligent transportation system measures to reduce
delays and improve travel time on Regional Truckways, Priority Truck
Streets and Major Truck Streets.

**Objective 9.15 Truck Accessibility** ***(formerly Objective 6.31)***

**9.15.a.** Evaluate and improve locations where inadequate roadway
design creates barriers for truck access in Freight Districts and on
designated truck streets.

**9.15.b.** Upgrade bridges to remove load limits and vertical clearance
restrictions on designated truck streets.

**9.15.c.** Use public-private collaboration to identify and implement
measures to minimize delays and improve safety at at-grade rail freight
crossings.

**9.15.d.** Provide adequate off-street loading areas for larger
employment, commercial and multi-family developments.

**9.15.e.** Manage supply, operations, and demand of on-street truck
loading spaces to ensure efficient, reliable and safe loading and
unloading activities.

**9.15.f.** Implement design guidelines for truck streets that meet the
dimensional needs of trucks, particularly for Freight Districts, while
balancing the needs of other transportation modes in the right-of-way.

**Objective 9.16 Multimodal Freight System *(formerly Objective 6.29)***

**9.16.a.** Support a well-integrated freight system that includes
truck, rail, marine, air, and pipeline modes as vital to a healthy
economy.

**9.16.b.** Coordinate with private and public stakeholders to identify
improvement and funding strategies for multimodal freight mobility
needs.

**9.16.c.** Participate with interjurisdictional partners in the
development of corridor plans, master plans, and regional facility plans
that impact freight mobility.

**9.16.d.** Address freight access and mobility needs when conducting
multimodal transportation studies or designing transportation
facilities.

**9.16.e.** Work with community stakeholders to minimize adverse impacts
of freight activity on the environmental and residential and mixed-use
neighborhoods.

**Objective 9.17 Multimodal Passenger Service *(formerly Objective
6.33)***

**9.17.a.** Support continuation of Union Station as the multimodal
transportation hub, serving as the primary passenger rail and intercity
bus terminal in the Portland metropolitan area and providing direct
connections among passenger rail, light rail, streetcar, intracity
buses, taxis, and airport shuttle buses.

**9.17.b.** Support continuation of Portland International Airport as
the multimodal passenger air facility hub by encouraging direct
connections for all modes, including light rail transit, buses, taxis,
and airport shuttles.

**9.17.c.** Support development of passenger transfer facilities in
existing and emerging regional centers.

**9.17.d.** Support commuter rail service where it will reinforce the
2040 Growth Concept and is an efficient alternative to the automobile.

**9.17.e.** Support expansion of Northwest Corridor passenger rail
service between Eugene, Portland, Seattle, and Vancouver, B. C. by
incremental improvements in speed, frequency, and station facilities, in
cooperation with the States of Oregon and Washington and the Province of
British Columbia.

**Objective 9.18 Regional Trafficways** ***(formerly Objective 6.32)***

**9.18.a.** Regard the City’s Regional Trafficway system within Portland
to be substantially complete, except for safety or other improvements to
existing facilities that increase their efficiency.

**9.18.b**. Oppose extension of a new circumferential freeway north of
US 26 into the City and through Forest Park.

**Objective 9.19 Emergency Response** ***(formerly Objective 6.14)***

**9.19.a.** Use the emergency response classification system to
determine whether traffic-slowing devices can be employed.

**9.19.b.** Use the emergency response classification system to guide
the routing of emergency response vehicles.

**9.19.c.** Use the emergency response classification system to help
site future fire stations.

**Objective 9.20 Transportation System** **Management *(formerly
Objective 6.15)***

**9.20.a.** Reduce and manage automobile travel demand and promote
transportation choices before considering the addition of roadway
capacity for single-occupant vehicles.

**9.20.b.** Employ transportation system management measures, including
coordinating and synchronizing signals and intersection redesign, to
improve mobility and safety for all modes of travel.

**9.20.c.** Design, build, and operate the transportation system so that
it can be safely navigated by all users.

**Objective 9.21 Traffic Calming (formerly Objective 6.13)**

**9.21.a.** Manage traffic on Neighborhood Collectors and Local Service
Streets consistent with the land uses they serve and to preserve and
enhance neighborhood livability.

**9.21.b.** Encourage non-local traffic, including trucks, to use
streets of higher traffic and truck classifications through design,
operations, permitting, and signing.

**9.21.c.** Implement measures on Local Service Traffic Streets that do
not significantly divert traffic to other streets of the same
classification, except when needed to give priority to pedestrians
and/or bicycle traffic.

**9.21.d.** Implement measures on Neighborhood Collectors that do not
result in significant diversion of traffic to streets of lower
classification.

**9.21.e.** Reduce traffic speeds through enforcement and design in high
density main streets, Centers and Corridors, to levels that are safe and
comfortable for bicyclists and pedestrians.

**9.21.f.** Use traffic calming tools, traffic diversion**,** and other
available tools and methods to create and maintain sufficiently low
automotive volumes and speeds on neighborhood greenways to ensure a
comfortable cycling environment on the street.

**Objective 9.22 Access Management *(formerly Objective 6.16)***

**9.22.a.** Work with ODOT to manage the location, spacing, and type of
road and street intersections on Regional Trafficways, St. Helens Road,
Lombard east of Interstate 5, and McLoughlin, and develop access
management plans for other City streets as needed to ensure the safe and
efficient operation of these facilities.

**9.22.b.** Provide local access to arterials, while minimizing
conflicts with through-traffic.

**9.22.c.** Ensure that access management measures do not adversely
impact any transportation mode, consistent with the classifications of
the street where these measures are applied.

**Objective 9.23 Regional and City Travel Patterns** ***(formerly
Objective 6.12)***

**9.23.a.** Direct interregional traffic to use Regional Trafficways and
Regional Transitways, and manage these facilities to maximize their
existing capacity.

**9.23.b.** Minimize the impact of interregional and long intraregional
trips on Portland neighborhood and commercial areas, while supporting
the travel needs of the community.

**9.23.c.** Manage traffic on Neighborhood Collectors that Metro
designates as Collectors of Regional Significance so they maintain their
function as distributors of traffic between Major City Traffic Streets
or District Collectors and Local Service Streets, rather than function
primarily for regional traffic movement.

**9.23.d.** Use the TSP refinement plan process to determine specific
projects and actions to meet needs in identified transportation
corridors.

**Objective 9.24 Connectivity *(formerly Objective 6.20)***

**9.24.a.** Provide interconnected local and collector streets to serve
new and redeveloping areas and to ensure safe, efficient, and convenient
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicle access with preference for public
streets over private streets.

**9.24.b.** Create short blocks through development of frequent street
connections in mixed-use areas of planned high-density development.

**9.24.c.** Provide convenient and safe bicycle and pedestrian
connections to transit routes, schools, and parks, as well as within and
between new and existing residential developments, employment areas, and
other activity centers where street connections are not feasible.

**9.24.d.** Use large-scale Green Streets as a means of connecting
neighborhoods, using the right-of-way efficiently, and enhancing
neighborhood livability.

**Objective 9.25 Street Plans *(formerly Objective 11.11)***

**9.25.a.** Develop conceptual master street plans for areas of the City
that have significant amounts of vacant or underdeveloped land and where
the street network does not meet City and Metro connectivity guidelines.

**9.25.b.** Ensure that new residential development and development in
zones that allow a mix of uses include street plans that are consistent
with master street plans, extend and connect to adjacent areas, and meet
connectivity objectives.

**9.25.c.** Identify opportunities to extend and connect streets,
provide direct public right-of-way routes, and limit the use of
cul-de-sac and other closed-end street designs.

**9.25.d.** Provide full street connections with spacing of no more than
530 feet between connections, except where prevented by barriers such as
topography, railroads, freeways, or environmental constraints. Where
streets must cross over protected water features, provide crossings at
an average spacing of 800 to 1,200 feet, unless exceptional habitat
quality or length of crossing prevents a full street connection.

**9.25.e.** Provide bike and pedestrian connections at approximately
330-foot intervals on public easements or rights-of-way when full street
connections are not possible, except where prevented by barriers such as
topography, railroads, freeways, or environmental constraints. Bike and
pedestrian connections that cross protected water features should have
an average spacing of no more than 530 feet, unless exceptional habitat
quality or length of crossing prevents a connection.

**9.25.f.** As the South Waterfront District develops, provide
connectivity for all modes of travel by developing the streets and
accessways as shown on Chapter 11, Map 1.

**9.25.g.** As the western half of the Bridgeton neighborhood develops,
provide connectivity for all modes of travel by developing the streets
as shown in Chapter 11, Map 2.

**9.25.h.** As the Gateway regional center redevelops, provide
additional connectivity for all modes of travel as shown in Chapter 11,
Map 3.

**9.25.i.** As the Airport Way vicinity continues to develop, use the
Airport Way Secondary Infrastructure Plan as a guide to provide
connectivity for all modes of travel by developing streets as shown in
Chapter 11, Map 4.

**9.25.j.** Continue to provide connectivity in the River District for
all modes of travel by developing public and private streets as shown in
Chapter 11, Map 5.

**9.25.k.** As the Southwest District develops, provide connectivity for
all modes of travel by developing streets as shown in Chapter 11, Map 6.

**9.25.l.** As the Far Southeast District develops, provide connectivity
for all modes of travel by developing streets as shown in Chapter 11,
Map 7.

**9.25.m.** As the street system is modified around the west end of the
Ross Island Bridge, provide enhanced connectivity for all modes as shown
in Chapter11, Map 8.

**9.25.n.** Preserve street connectivity in areas of the City that meet
the standards of this policy and its objectives as shown in Chapter11,
Maps 9 through 16.

**9.25.o.** Improve connectivity in the St. Johns town center by
implementing the St. Johns Master Street Plan as shown in Chapter 11,
Map 17.

**9.25.p.** Improve and preserve connectivity in the Northwest District
by implementing the Northwest District Master Street Plan as shown in
Chapter 11, Map 18.

**9.25.q.** Establish a network of streets in Multnomah County
Unincorporated Urban Pockets to provide connectivity for all modes of
travel as shown in Chapter 11, Maps 19 A through C.

**Objective 9.26 Performance Measures (formerly Objective 11.13) **

**9.26.a.** Maintain acceptable levels of performance on the regional
transportation system, consistent with Table 9.1, in the development and
adoption of, and amendments to, the Transportation System Plan and in
legislative amendments to the Comprehensive Plan Map.

**9.26.b.** Use level-of-service as one measure to evaluate the adequacy
of transportation facilities in the vicinity of sites subject to land
use review.

**9.26.c.** Use alternatives to the level-of-service measure to
determine the adequacy of the transportation system in areas that
exhibit the following characteristics:

-   A mix of land uses, including residential

-   A mode split consistent with targets established for the area

-   Maximum parking ratios

-   Adequate existing street connectivity

**9.26.d.** In areas identified by Metro that exceed the
level-of-service in Table 9.1 and are planned to, but do not currently
meet the alternative performance criteria, establish an action plan that
does the following:

-   Anticipates growth and future impacts of motor vehicle traffic on
    multimodal travel in the area

-   Establishes strategies for mitigating the future impacts of motor
    vehicles

-   Establishes performance standards for monitoring and implementing
    the action plan

**9.26.e.** Develop performance measures to track progress in creating
and maintaining the transportation system.

**9.26.f.** Establish mode split targets in 2040 Growth Concept areas
within the City, consistent with Metro’s targets for these areas.

**9.26.g.** By 2035, reduce the number of miles Portlanders travel by
car to 11 miles per day on average and 70 percent of commuters walk,
bike, take transit, carpool, or work from home at approximately the
following rates:

Walk 7.5%

Bicycle 25%

Transit 25%

Carpool 10%

**9.26.h.** By 2035, increase the mode share of daily non-drive alone
trips to 70% citywide and to the following in the five pattern areas:

Central City 87%

Inner Neighborhoods 71%

Western Neighborhoods 65%

Eastern Neighborhoods 65%

Industrial and River 55%

**9.26.i.** By 2035, reduce Portland’s transportation-related carbon
emissions to 50% below 1990 levels, at approximately 934,000 metric
tons.

**9.26.j.** By 2025, increase the percentage of new mixed use zone
building households not owning an automobile from approximately 13%
(2014) to 25%, and reduce the percentage of households owning two
automobiles from approximately 24% to 10%.

**Objective 9.27 Congestion Pricing *(formerly Objective 6.34) ***

**9.27.a.** Support pricing strategies that are based on the
environmental and social costs of motor vehicles.

**9.27.b.** In cooperation with Metro and other jurisdictions, choose
corridors to implement market-based pricing where high-quality
transportation alternatives to driving exist.

**Objective 9.28 Travel Management (formerly Objective 6.28) **

**9.28.a.** Develop neighborhood-based programs to promote and support
multimodal strategies and trip reduction strategies and programs.

**9.28.b.** Meet the access and mobility needs of businesses and
employees in key employment and regional centers with customized
alternative transportation programs that result in reduced congestion
and improved air quality.

**9.28.c.** Support and encourage the growth of car sharing among City
residents and businesses through actions that expand the supply of car
sharing vehicles at convenient locations and actions that increase the
demand for car sharing services.

**9.28.d.** Require institutions to regulate parking facilities, first
to provide short-term parking for visitors and, second, to minimize the
amount of employee parking through demand management measures such as
carpooling, ridesharing, flexible work hours, telecommuting, parking
management, and employer-subsidized transit passes.

**9.28.e.** Require institutions to mitigate excessive parking impacts
on residential areas.

**9.28.f.** Require institutions and new development to participate in
programs to reduce single-occupant automobile trips.

**Objective 9.29 Parking Management *(formerly Objective 6.25)***

**9.29.a.** Implement measures to achieve Portland’s share of the
mandated 10 percent reduction in parking spaces per capita within the
metropolitan area over the next 20 years.

**9.29.b.** Consider transportation capacity and parking demand for all
motor vehicles in the regulation of the parking supply.

**9.29.c.** Develop parking management programs and strategies that
improve air quality, reduce congestion, promote alternatives to the
drive-alone commute, and educate and involve businesses and
neighborhoods.

**Objective 9.30 On-Street Parking Management *(formerly Objective
6.26)***

**9.30.a.** Support land uses in existing and emerging regional centers,
town centers, neighborhood centers, and main streets with an adequate
supply of on-street parking spaces while emphasizing grouped bicycle
parking in the street.

**9.30.b.** Maintain existing on-street parking in older neighborhoods
and commercial areas where off-street parking is inadequate, except
where parking removal is necessary to accommodate alternatives to the
automobile.

**9.30.c.** Support carpooling in commercial districts by providing
convenient, affordable, and adequate on-street spaces.

**9.30.d.** Develop and maintain on-street parking meter districts to
provide for customer turnover, reduce on-street parking use by
commuters, efficiently allocate parking among diverse users, encourage
the use of alternatives to the automobile, and provide a funding source
for transportation projects within the districts.

**9.30.e.** Provide and maintain public bicycle parking at high-demand
locations in the Central City, neighborhood business nodes, cultural and
recreational destinations, transit nodes and employment centers.

**9.30.f.** Ensure a highly functional and high quality design of
bicycle parking installed in the public right of way for a variety of
bicycle types.

**Objective 9.31 Off-Street Parking *(formerly Objective 6.27)***

**9.31.a.** Consider eliminating requirements for off-street parking in
areas of the City where there is existing or planned high-quality
transit service and good pedestrian and bicycle access.

**9.31.b.** Encourage the redevelopment of surface parking lots into
transit-supportive uses or development or to include facilities for
alternatives to the automobile.

**9.31.c.** Limit the development of new parking spaces to achieve land
use, transportation, and environmental objectives.

**9.31.d.** Support changes to regulations to ensure that all land uses
provide an ample quantity of short- and long-term bicycle parking for a
variety of bicycle types and end-of-trip facilities consistent with an
increasing bicycle mode share.

**9.31.e.** Encourage owners of existing residential or commercial
buildings to supplement and upgrade off-street long-term and short-term
bicycle parking for a variety of bicycle types.

**Objective 9.32 Transportation Education *(formerly Objective 6.3)***

**9.32.a.** Publicize activities and the availability of resources and
facilities that promote a multimodal transportation system.

**9.32.b.** Implement educational programs that recognize the need for
developing and maintaining a multimodal transportation system that
supports the movement of freight as well as people.

**9.32.c.** Encourage walking by developing education programs for both
motorists and pedestrians and by supporting and participating in
encouragement events for pedestrians.

**9.32.d.** Develop and implement education and encouragement plans
aimed at youth and adult cyclists and motorists.

**9.32.e.** Increase public awareness of the benefits of walking and
bicycling and of available resources and facilities.

**9.32.f.** Develop a strong school curriculum and program on
transportation safety and travel choices with emphasis on environmental
consequences, neighborhood livability, personal safety, and health.

**9.32.g.** Educate citizens and businesses about Green Streets and how
they can serve as urban greenways to enhance, improve, and connect
neighborhoods to encourage their support, demand and funding for these
projects.

**9.32.h.** Increase bicycle safety education, enforcement and outreach
to encourage safe travel behavior of all modes and to increase bicycling
in Portland.

**9.32.i.** Promote bicycling as safe and convenient transportation to
and from school.

**9.32.j.** Continue and expand encouragement programs that provide
services and equipment, support behavior changes, raise awareness, and
provide incentives that increase bicycling in Portland.

**Objective 9.33 Project Selection *(formerly Objective 11.9)***

**9.33.a.** Address existing deficiencies or hazards by improving
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular safety.

**9.33.b.** Use good resource management and minimize or reduce negative
impacts to the natural environment.

**9.33.c.** Provide and improve access to, between and within activity
Comp Plan Centers and Corridors and develop safe routes to schools.

**9.33.d.** Improve access to existing and emerging employment and
industrial areas.

**9.33.e.** Promote street connectivity for all modes, especially in
areas where identified deficiencies exist, to support desired urban form
and travel patterns.

**9.33.f.** Address area-wide needs, including access and mobility,
environmental protection, Green Street design and quality urban design,
in a comprehensive approach to project selection.

**9.33.g.** Increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the system by
wise application of available financial, capital, and human resources

**9.33.h.** Develop the transportation system consistent with and
supportive of community values.

**Objective 9.34 North Transportation District (formerly Objective
6.35)**

**9.34.a.** Improve truck and freight movement in North Portland through
changes to the street system, street classifications, and signing to
enhance the economic vitality of the area and minimize impacts on
residential, commercial, and recreational areas.

**9.34.b.** Support efficient functioning of the N Marine Drive/ N
Lombard (west of N Philadelphia)/N Columbia Boulevard loop as the truck
and commuter access to the Rivergate industrial area and adjacent
industrial areas.

**9.34.c.** Direct industrial traffic onto N Columbia Boulevard, while
allowing limited access from residential neighborhoods and mitigating
for unacceptable traffic impacts.

**9.34.d.** Implement the Phase 1 and Phase 2 improvements recommended
in the I-5 Delta Park Environmental Assessment.

**9.34.e.** Consult with the Federal Highway Administration and ODOT to
remove the US 30 Bypass designation from Philadelphia and Lombard, west
of Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard, and relocate it to more
appropriate streets to minimize impacts on the St Johns town center and
the Lombard main street.

**9.34.f.** Support improvements to transit service that will link North
Portland to areas outside the downtown, especially to the Rose Quarter
transit center and industrial areas within and outside the district.

**9.34.g.** Encourage transit coverage and frequency improvements, as
well as bus stop improvements, within the district and within commercial
and employment centers, including Portland International Raceway, Swan
Island, and Rivergate.

**9.34.h.** Develop light rail transit on North Interstate and to the
Exposition Center; place stations at major arterials where good feeder
bus service can be provided; capitalize on redevelopment opportunities
that support light rail; and mitigate potential negative impacts of
diversion of automobile traffic onto nearby Neighborhood Collectors and
Local Service Traffic Streets.

**9.34.i.** Preserve the planned functions of Willamette Boulevard by
evaluating and implementing transportation measures along N Lombard east
of N St. Louis to improve Lombard’s function as a District Collector and
main street.

**9.34.j.** Improve pedestrian and bicycle access within the St. Johns
town center and from nearby destinations, including Pier Park, the
Columbia Slough, and Smith and Bybee Lakes.

**9.34.k.** Develop additional east/west and north/south bicycle routes
to serve commuter and recreational bicyclists and provide connections to
Northeast Portland bikeways.

**9.34.l.** Complete the sidewalk system in North Portland, including
enhanced pedestrian crossings on streets with high volumes of vehicle
traffic.

**9.34.m.** Consider extension of the Willamette Greenway Trail south
from its current designation that ends at Edgewater and connecting to
the trail on Swan Island, following the outcome of a feasibility study.

**9.34.n.** Explore opportunities for additional street connections over
the railroad cut and between the Willamette River and nearby residential
areas.

**9.34.o.** Improve parking management within the St. Johns town center
and at Portland International Raceway.

**9.34.p.** Encourage the use of Columbia Boulevard as the primary route
for over-dimensional truckloads while ensuring the role of N Lombard
(west of Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard) as an interim route until
such time as improvements are completed that allow North Columbia to
accommodate all types of over-dimensional truckloads.

**Objective 9.35 Northeast Transportation District (formerly Objective
6.36)**

**9.35.a.** Encourage automobile and truck through-traffic to use major
arterials near the edges of the district to reduce peak-period traffic
impacts and to preserve neighborhood livability.

**9.35.b.** Enhance traffic and pedestrian access and improve transit
service to regional and district commercial areas, including Lloyd
Center, Hollywood, Rose City Park, Sandy Boulevard, and the neighborhood
commercial district at NE 60^th^/Prescott/Cully.

**9.35.c.** Retain Portland Boulevard’s interchange with I-5, while
maintaining its function and appearance as a Neighborhood Collector east
of I-5.

**9.35.d.** Encourage the use of I-84 and I-205 for primary access to
the Columbia South Shore, Portland International Airport, and Portland
International Center; encourage the use of NE Airport Way (east of
I-205) and Portland Boulevard/Killingsworth (south of the Columbia
Slough) as the secondary access from the interstate system.

**9.35.e.** Improve transit service and facilities where needed to serve
employment areas, including the Columbia Corridor, Northwest industrial
area, and developing residential areas.

**9.35.f.** Work with Tri-Met and businesses to encourage the use of
alternatives to automobiles, particularly in the Columbia Corridor,
through transit service improvements and incentives and transportation
demand management techniques such as flexible work hours, telecommuting,
carpooling, bicycling, and vanpooling.

**9.35.g.** Continue to develop east/west and north/south bicycle
routes, both on-street and off-street, to connect with existing bikeways
(including those on East Burnside and I-205) and with work, school,
commercial, and recreational destinations.

**9.35.h.** Increase pedestrian access to transit throughout the
district, including enhancing pedestrian districts where through-traffic
is discouraged.

**9.35.i.** Implement the projects recommended in the Columbia Corridor
Transportation Study that improve vehicle and transit access, safety for
all modes, and local connections.

**9.35j.** Balance the needs of adjacent land uses (located in a design
zone) at the NE Lombard and Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard
intersection with the need for truck movement.

**9.35.k.** Implement the recommendations in the Hollywood and Sandy
Plan to create a pedestrian-friendly and transit-supportive town center
and main street, with emphasis at key nodes where neighborhood services
and mixed-use development are encouraged.

**9.35.l.** Use street dedications and street vacations as a tool to
support development, while ensuring connectivity and access.

**9.35.m.** Bring substandard streets up to City standards, including
construction of sidewalks, especially in the Cully neighborhood.

**Objective 9.36 Far Northeast Transportation District (formerly
Objective 6.37)**

**9.36.a.** Enhance the arterial street system by improving connections
between Neighborhood Collectors and District Collectors and eliminating
bottlenecks, such as narrow rail viaducts, that contribute to intrusions
into residential neighborhoods by commercial, industrial, and non-local
traffic.

**9.36.b.** Improve cross-town transit service to accommodate trips
within the Far Northeast District, transit service along Sandy, and
transit connections to light rail.

**9.36.c.** Improve the designated bicycle network and connect major
routes to routes in adjacent districts and jurisdictions.

**9.36.d.** Implement the Gateway Concept and Redevelopment Strategy
recommendations to provide street connections as redevelopment occurs,
manage regional traffic impacts, and focus boulevard and main street
improvements on 102^nd^.

**9.36.e.** Resolve the long-term future of the park-and-ride facility
at the Gateway transit center to reinforce the regional center’s
long-term vitality.

**9.36.f.** Add pedestrian facilities, including sidewalks and
crossings, and enhancements, such as street trees and drinking
fountains, to provide good access within neighborhoods and to Gateway
and other commercial areas.

<span id="_gjdgxs" class="anchor"></span>

**Objective 9.37 Southeast Transportation District (formerly Objective
6.38)**

**9.37.a.** Direct interdistrict traffic to Regional Trafficways on the
edges of the district, and manage traffic on Major City Traffic Streets
and other arterials primarily through transportation system management
measures.

**9.37.b.** Support improvements to SE McLoughlin Boulevard to ensure
its function as the major north/south route for regional traffic, while
maintaining its operational characteristics as a Major City Traffic
Street between Powell and Reedway and addressing pedestrian and
bicyclist access along and across the street.

**9.37.c.** Operate Neighborhood Collectors in Southeast Portland to
function primarily as circulation for district traffic rather than as
regional streets, even where they carry a significant amount of regional
traffic.

**9.37.d.** Facilitate pedestrian access and safety in Southeast
Portland by improving connections to the Willamette River; adding
connections between neighborhoods and parks, institutions, and
commercial areas; and enhancing pedestrian crossings with curb
extensions and improved markings.

**9.37.e.** Improve access and safety for bicycles through the
development of more inner Southeast east/west bike routes and the
provision of bicycle facilities across bridges and to a variety of
destinations, including downtown, the river, and parks.

**9.37.f.** Recognize SE Foster’s (west of I-205) importance as a main
street and as a Major City Traffic Street and Major City Transit Street
by improving the pedestrian environment, preserving on-street parking,
facilitating transit movement, and adding street trees.

**9.37.g.** Encourage regional and interdistrict truck traffic to use
Regional Truckways, Priority and Major Streets in southeast Portland by
establishing convenient truck routing that better serves trucks, while
protecting Southeast neighborhoods.

**9.37.h.** Minimize left-turn movements to auto-accommodating
development along SE 39th Avenue, and eliminate or consolidate driveways
where possible.

**9.37.i.** Continue to improve cross-town transit service, transit
facilities and bus stops, and transit travel times, and expand off-peak
and weekend service to provide access to activity centers on Portland’s
eastside.

**9.37.j.** Support planning for and development of light rail transit
and streetcars in Southeast Portland, including consideration of feeder
transit service and pedestrian and bicycle access.

**9.37.k.** Examine the potential for returning SE Belmont and SE
Morrison between SE 12th and 25th to two-way streets in the future, and
make changes to street classifications if needed to support and
reinforce Belmont’s role as a main street.

**9.37.l.** Support SE Tacoma’s function as a main street and District
Collector in the future, and support and implement transportation
projects that will reinforce these designations.

**9.37.m.** Implement transportation improvements identified in the
Lents Urban Renewal Plan that will revitalize its commercial core and
environs.

**9.37.n.** Support the livability of Southeast neighborhoods by
improving the efficiency of parking and loading in commercial areas and
by reducing commuter parking in residential areas.

**9.37.o.** Address the safety and access needs of pedestrians and
bicyclists as part of freight-related street improvements for SE Holgate
between SE 26^th^ Avenue and McLoughlin Boulevard.

**Objective 9.38 Far Southeast Transportation District (formerly
Objective 6.39)**

**9.38.a.** Consider existing and future land use patterns,
environmental impacts, the need for additional connectivity of
collectors, and transit accessibility when improvements are planned and
designed for the arterial system, particularly SE Powell and SE Foster.

**9.38.b.** Improve arterials through better signalization and
intersection design to serve adjacent land uses and to provide for
access to adjacent neighborhoods, while minimizing non-local traffic on
local streets.

**9.38.c.** Accommodate bicyclists and pedestrians along arterials and
at crossings, especially at activity nodes, through a combination of
street and traffic management improvements.

**9.38.d.** Reduce travel demand in the district by providing additional
transit service, including feeder service to light rail and alternatives
to buses for low-density areas.

**9.38.e.** Consider implementing parking controls in the vicinity of
light rail stations where commuter parking is impacting nearby
residential neighborhoods.

**9.38.f.** Provide adequate street connections in the Far Southeast
District through the development and implementation of master street
plans that identify connections for vehicles, pedestrians, and
bicyclists.

**9.38.g.** Support transit and pedestrian-friendly development along
the Division main street with multimodal transportation investments.

**9.38.h.** Implement transportation improvements identified in the
Lents Urban Renewal Plan that will revitalize its commercial core and
environs.

**9.38.i.** Implement the Gateway Concept and Redevelopment Strategy
recommendations to provide street connections as redevelopment occurs,
manage regional traffic impacts, and focus boulevard and main street
improvements on 102^nd^.

**9.38.j.** Improve pedestrian access at the light rail transit stations
by adding local street connections and improvements, including enhanced
crossings and wider sidewalks.

**9.38.k.** Provide an off-street pathway and reasonable public access
between the neighborhood south of SE Market, through the medical center
campus, and extending through the commercial area south of SE
Washington.

**9.38.l.** Implement recommendations from the Pleasant Valley Concept
and Implementation Plans to create a community with a well-connected
street system that provides safety and convenience for all modes of
transportation.

**Objective 9.39 Northwest Transportation District (formerly Objective
6.40)**

**9.39.a.** Expand transit service throughout the district, including
adding more cross-town service, connecting bus service from the Civic
Stadium light rail station to the northwest industrial area, and
improving service in low-density areas such as Linnton.

**9.39.b.** Route non-local traffic, including non-local truck traffic,
on Major City Traffic Streets and Regional Trafficways in order to
minimize conflicts among modes.

**9.39.c.** Incorporate pedestrian and bicycle access improvements into
all transportation projects, especially along arterials and at crossing
locations.

**9.39.d.** Protect Forest Park’s natural resources in the design and
development of transportation projects in or near the park.

**9.39.e.** Reinforce the Northwest District main streets – NW 21^st^,
23^rd^, Burnside, and Thurman – by retaining and improving their
pedestrian-oriented character and improving access to transit.

**9.39.f** Support a range of strategies in the high-density portions of
the district to address parking issues, including commuter and event
parking impacts.

**9.39.g.** Maintain neighborhood livability in the construction or
reconstruction of streets by adding street trees, buffering pedestrians
from traffic, and preserving on-street parking.

**9.39.h.** Limit transportation projects on West Burnside to those that
reduce vehicle miles traveled, give preference to transit, improve
pedestrian and bicycle access, or improve safety, but do not increase
automobile capacity.

**9.39.i.** Improve access to NW 14^th^ and 16^th^ to support their
function as connections to the commercial and industrial areas in
Northwest Portland and to reduce impacts of non-local traffic on
residential areas.

**9.39.j.** Evaluate and make recommendations on returning the NW
Everett/NW Glisan and the NW18th/NW 19^th^ couplets to two-way streets.

**9.39.k.** Support the scenic and natural character of NW Skyline
Boulevard by focusing non-local north/south traffic between West
Burnside and NW Cornell Road on NW Miller.

**9.39.l.** Preserve and enhance freight mobility, and industrial access
in the Freight District, by maintaining or improving truck operations on
Front Avenue, Yeon Avenue , Nicolai Street, St Helens Road, and the
14^th^ and 16^th^ Avenues couplet.

**Objective 9.40 Southwest Transportation District (formerly Objective
6.41)**

**9.40.a.** Use the Willamette Shore Line right-of-way, the corridor
identified in the Macadam Corridor Improvement Plan, or other alignment
as appropriate to provide future streetcar commuter service or light
rail in the Macadam corridor.

**9.40.b.** Improve the primary transportation functions of SW Broadway
Drive, SW Patton Road, SW Vista, SW Humphrey, and SW Dosch Road as
Neighborhood Collectors by supporting pedestrian, bicycle, and transit
use; calming traffic; and discouraging heavy volumes of non-local
commuter traffic.

**9.40.c.** Consider designation of a ‘Red Electric Line’ alignment for
pedestrians and bicyclists, as identified in the Southwest Urban Trails
Plan, upon completion of a feasibility study.

**9.40.d.** Evaluate the transportation impacts on adjacent
neighborhoods when considering increases in development potential of
large new or redeveloping areas, and include mitigation measures in
development plans.

**9.40.e.** Use the Southwest Urban Trail Plan as a guide to dedicating
and developing trail segments in Southwest.

**Public Facilities and Services Objectives**
=============================================

The objectives contained within the TSP offer further details to support
the Comp Plan Goals and Policies. Objectives are specific statements
that implement, and help assess incremental progress towards, the goals
and policies. Some objectives contained within the TSP are required for
compliance with State and Regional goals, policies and regulations.

**Objective 8.1 Street Design and Right-of-Way (formerly Objective
11.10)**

**8.1.a.** Make changes to public rights-of-way that are consistent with
their street classifications and descriptions in the Transportation
Element of the Comprehensive Plan.

**8.1.b.** Consider the needs and safety of all users of a planned
facility in its design and during the construction process.

**8.1.c.** When changes to a right-of-way are proposed, consider the
overall capacity impacts to the immediately affected street, as well as
potential areawide capacity impacts.

**8.1.d.** Use Metro street design guidelines (Creating Livable Streets:
Street Design for 2040, November 1997 and Green Streets, July 2002) as a
resource in developing and designing projects for streets on the
regional system.

**8.1.e.** Use a variety of transportation resources in developing and
designing projects for all City streets, such as the City of Portland’s
Pedestrian Design Guide, Bicycle Master Plan-Appendix A, NACTO Urban
Bikeway Design Guide, NACTO Urban Street Design Guide, *Portland Parks
and Recreation Trail Design Guidelines, Designing* for *Truck Movements*
and Other Large Vehicles, and City of Portland Green Street Policy,
Stormwater Management Manual, and Design Guide for Public Street
Improvements.

**8.1.f.** Provide planned bicycle facilities on designated alignments
and in conjunction with street improvements, or develop equally safe and
convenient alternative access for bicycles on parallel streets when the
appropriate bikeway facility cannot be provided on the designated
street.

**8.1.g.** Include improvements that enhance transit operations, safety,
and travel times in projects on existing or planned transit routes.

**8.1.h.** Improve streets within Freight Districts and on
truck-designated streets to facilitate truck movements.

**8.1.i.** Construct local residential streets to minimize pavement
width and total right-of-way width, consistent with the operational
needs of the facility and taking into account the needs of both
pedestrians and vehicles.

**8.1.j.** Ensure that transportation facilities are accessible to all
people and that all improvements to the transportation system (traffic,
transit, bicycle, and pedestrian) in the public right-of-way comply with
the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.

**8.1.k.** Encourage the beautification of the City by incorporating
appropriate streetscape elements along regionally designated streets and
along other City-designated arterials, in conjunction with the Urban
Forestry Program.

**8.1.l.** Encourage the formation of local improvement districts (LIDs)
for the construction of transportation infrastructure, which may include
streets, curbs, or other structures; pedestrian or bicycle facilities;
drainage; and street trees.

**8.1.m.** Continue to explore cost-effective methods to finance local
street improvements, including green streets projects.

**8.1.n.** Consider and minimize impacts on the natural environment and
watershed health, consistent with the City and regional response to the
Endangered Species Act, the City’s Green Streets Policy and stream
crossing design guidelines in the Green Streets handbook, in the
planning, design, and development of transportation projects.

**8.1.o.** Consider the desired character of the area, including
neighborhood livability, in the design and development of transportation
projects.

**8.1.p.** Develop standards and incentives to encourage Green Streets
projects in private development, redevelopment and enhancement projects
wherever technically and economically feasible.

**8.1.q.** Require adequate right-of-way or easements where adequate
space for planned bikeway and pedestrian facilities is not available.

**8.1.r.** Continue to test, evaluate, and implement appropriate
innovative design treatments that improve operating conditions and
safety for cyclists.

**8.1.s.** Utilize interim bicycle facility improvements where the
preferred design treatment is not currently feasible.

**Objective 8.2 Environmental Sustainability (formerly Objective 11.8)**

**8.2.a.** Integrate best management practices into all aspects of the
Portland Bureau of Transportation activities.

**8.2.b.** Continue to reuse and recycle office and construction
materials and equipment, compost leaves, and separate street debris.

**8.2.c.** Maintain equipment and facilities to minimize air, water, and
noise pollution.

**8.2.d.** Use environmentally safe products.

**8.2.e.** Minimize runoff and erosion in all ground-disturbing
activities, including construction, excavation, landscaping, and trench
work.

**8.2.f.** Use alternative energy sources to power equipment whenever
feasible.

**8.2.g.** Incorporate sustainable and Green Street design solutions for
streets and other transportation projects.

**Objective 8.3 Maintenance (formerly Objective 11.12)**

**8.3.a.** Consider the potential impacts of maintenance obligations and
life-cycle costs in the development of transportation projects and
programs.

**8.3.b.** Incorporate retrofitting or removing impervious surfaces and
culverts identified in the region’s fish passage and watershed
management programs into maintenance activities for the transportation
system.

**8.3.c.** Use best management practices to address environmental
impacts of maintenance activities.

**8.3.d.** Pursue strategies for new sources of revenues for maintenance
of the transportation system.

**8.3.e.** Coordinate capital improvement program development with
ongoing maintenance needs in addition to preservation and rehabilitation
projects.

**8.3.f.** Make improvements to the bicycle network, including removing
physical hazards, and maintain the bicycle infrastructure in a timely
and efficient manner.
