Policies
========

**Design and planning**

The City of Portland’s transportation system is a key public facility.
The following policies describe what the transportation system is, what
it does, and what factors to consider in how the overall system is used.
*Policies 8.1-8.60 in Chapter 8: Public Facilities and Services also
apply to the need for quality facilities and services, multiple
benefits, reliability, and creating a multi-purpose and safe
right-of-way.*

**Policy 9.1 Street design classifications.** Maintain and implement
street design classifications consistent with land use plans,
environmental context, urban design pattern areas, and the Neighborhood
Corridor and Civic Corridor Urban Design Framework designations.

**Policy 9.2 Street policy classifications.** Maintain and implement
street policy classifications for pedestrian, bicycle, transit, freight,
emergency vehicle, and automotive movement, while considering access for
all modes, connectivity, adjacent planned land uses, and state and
regional requirements.

> **9.2.a.** Designate district classifications that emphasize freight
> mobility and access in industrial and employment areas serving high
> levels of truck traffic and to accommodate the needs of intermodal
> freight movement.
>
> **9.2.b.** Designate district classifications that give priority to
> pedestrian access in areas where high levels of pedestrian activity
> exist or are planned, including the Central City, Gateway regional
> center, town centers, neighborhood centers, and transit station
> areas.\
> \
> **9.2.c.** Designate district classifications that give priority to
> bicycle access and mobility in areas where high levels of bicycle
> activity exist or are planned, including Downtown, the River District,
> Lloyd District, Gateway Regional Center, town centers, neighborhood
> centers, and transit station areas.

**Policy 9.3 Transportation System Plan.** Maintain and implement the
Transportation System Plan (TSP) as the decision-making tool for
transportation-related projects, policies, programs, and street design.

**Policy 9.4 Use of classifications.** Plan, develop, implement, and
manage the transportation system in accordance with street design and
policy classifications outlined in the Transportation System Plan.

**Policy 9.5** **Mode share goals and Vehicle Miles Travelled (VMT)
reduction.** Increase the share of trips made using active and
low-carbon transportation modes. Reduce VMT to achieve targets set in
the most current Climate Action Plan and Transportation System Plan, and
meet or exceed Metro’s mode share and VMT targets.

**Policy 9.6 Transportation strategy for people movement.** Implement a
prioritization of modes for people movement by making transportation
system decisions according to the following ordered list:

1.  Walking

2.  Bicycling

3.  Transit

4.  Taxi / commercial transit / shared vehicles

5.  Zero emission vehicles

6.  Other single-occupant vehicles

When implementing this prioritization, ensure that:

-   The needs and safety of each group of users are considered, and
    > changes do not make existing conditions worse for the most
    > vulnerable users higher on the ordered list.

-   All users’ needs are balanced with the intent of optimizing the
    > right of way for multiple modes on the same street.

-   When necessary to ensure safety, accommodate some users on parallel
    > streets as part of a multi-street corridor.

-   Land use and system plans, network functionality for all modes,
    > other street functions, and complete street policies,
    > are maintained.

-   Policy-based rationale is provided if modes lower in the ordered
    > list are prioritized.

*Specific modal policies are found below in policies 9.17 to 9.40.*

**Policy 9.7 Moving goods and delivering services.** In tandem with
people movement, maintain efficient and reliable movement of goods and
services as a critical transportation system function. Prioritize
freight system reliability improvements over single-occupancy vehicle
mobility where there are solutions that distinctly address those
different needs. *Multimodal freight policies are found below in
policies 9.33 to 9.35.*

**Policy 9.8** **Affordability.** Improve and maintain the
transportation system to increase access to convenient and affordable
transportation options for all Portlanders, especially those who have
traditionally been under-served or under-represented or have
historically borne unequal burdens.

**Policy 9.9 Accessible and age-friendly transportation system.** Ensure
that transportation facilities are accessible to people of all ages and
abilities, and that all improvements to the transportation system
(traffic, transit, bicycle, and pedestrian) in the public right-of-way
comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Improve and
adapt the transportation system to better meet the needs of the most
vulnerable users, including the young, older adults, and people with
different abilities.

**Policy 9.10** **Geographic policies.** Adopt geographically-specific
policies in the Transportation System Plan to ensure that transportation
infrastructure reflects the unique topography, historic character,
natural features, system gaps, economic needs, demographics, and land
uses of each area. Use the Pattern Areas identified in Chapter 3: Urban
Form as the basis for area policies.

Land use, development, and placemaking
---------------------------------------

Land use patterns and connections among different land uses are key
elements defining the form and character of places. In tandem with
Chapter 3: Urban Form and Chapter 4: Design and Development, the
policies in this section give direction for designing and building a
transportation system that supports, complements, and meets the needs of
different places. These policies acknowledge development adjacent to
transportation as a critical component in shaping the future of
Portland’s public spaces and places.

**Policy 9.11 Land use and transportation coordination.** Implement the
Comprehensive Plan Map and the Urban Design Framework though coordinated
long-range transportation and land use planning. Ensure that street
policy and design classifications and land uses complement one another.

**Policy 9.12 Growth strategy.** Use street design and policy
classifications to support Goals 3A-3G in Chapter 3: Urban Form.
Consider the different design contexts and transportation functions in
Town Centers, Neighborhood Centers, Neighborhood Corridors, Employment
Areas, Freight Corridors, Civic Corridors, Transit Station Areas, and
Greenways.

**Policy 9.13 Development and street design.** Evaluate adjacent land
uses to help inform street classifications in framing, shaping, and
activating the public space of streets. Guide development and land use
to create the kinds of places and street environments intended for
different types of streets.

**Streets as public spaces**

Streets, including sidewalks and planting strips, provide critical
transportation and utility functions. In Portland, streets are the most
abundant type of public space, occupying nearly 20 percent of land area
in the city. The following policies support community desire to expand
the use of streets beyond their transportation functions. *See Chapter
8: Public Facilities and Services and Chapter 4: Design and Development
for further use and streetscape policies.*

**Policy 9.14 Streets for transportation and public spaces.** Integrate
both placemaking and transportation functions when designing and
managing streets by encouraging design, development, and operation of
streets to enhance opportunities for them to serve as places for
community interaction, environmental function, open space, tree canopy,
recreation, and other community purposes.

**Policy 9.15 Repurposing street space.** Encourage repurposing street
segments that are not critical for transportation connectivity to other
community purposes.

**Policy 9.16 Design with nature.** Promote street and trail alignments
and designs that respond to topography and natural features, when
feasible, and protect streams, wildlife habitat, and native trees.

**Modal policies**

Portland is committed to providing a multimodal transportation system
that offers affordable and convenient travel options within the city,
region, and outside the Metro area. Because trips are made for different
reasons, they vary in length and type of vehicle (mode) needed to make
them. Different modes create different kinds of impacts — on
neighborhood livability and carbon emissions, for example. These
policies recognize that some modes are more appropriate than others for
different types of trips.

**Policy 9.17** **Pedestrian transportation**. Encourage walking as the
most attractive mode of transportation for most short trips, within
neighborhoods and to centers, corridors, and major destinations, and as
a means for accessing transit.

**Policy 9.18 Pedestrian networks.** Create more complete networks of
pedestrian facilities, and improve the quality of the pedestrian
environment.

**Policy 9.19 Pedestrian safety and accessibility.** Improve pedestrian
safety, accessibility, and convenience for people of all ages and
abilities.

**Policy 9.20 Bicycle transportation**. Create conditions that make
bicycling more attractive than driving for most trips of approximately
three miles or less.

**Policy 9.21 Accessible bicycle system.** Create a bicycle
transportation system that is safe, comfortable, and accessible to
people of all ages and abilities.

**Policy 9.22** **Public transportation**. Coordinate with public
transit agencies to create conditions that make transit the preferred
mode of travel for trips that are not made by walking or bicycling.

**Policy 9.23 Transportation to job centers.** Promote and enhance
transit to be more convenient and economical than the automobile for
people travelling more than three miles to and from the Central City and
Gateway. Enhance regional access to the Central City and access from
Portland to other regional job centers.

**Policy 9.24 Transit service.** In partnership with TriMet, develop a
public transportation system that conveniently, safely, comfortably, and
equitably serves residents and workers 24 hours a day, seven days a
week.

**Policy 9.25 Transit equity.** In partnership with TriMet, maintain and
expand high-quality frequent transit service to all Town Centers, Civic
Corridors, Neighborhood Centers, Neighborhood Corridors, and other major
concentrations of employment, and improve service to areas with high
concentrations of poverty and historically under-served and
under-represented communities.

**Policy 9.26 Transit funding.** Consider funding strategies and
partnership opportunities that improve access to and equity in transit
service, such as raising metro-wide funding to improve service and
decrease user fees/fares.

**Policy 9.27 Transit service to centers and corridors.** Use transit
investments as a means to shape the city’s growth and increase transit
use. In partnership with TriMet and Metro**,** maintain, expand, and
enhance Portland Streetcar, frequent service bus, and high-capacity
transit, to better serve centers and corridors with the highest
intensity of potential employment and household growth.

**Policy 9.28** **Intercity passenger service**. Coordinate planning and
project development to expand intercity passenger transportation
services in the Willamette Valley, and from Portland to California,
Seattle, and Vancouver, BC.

**Policy 9.29** **Regional trafficways and transitways**. Maintain
capacity of regional transitways and existing regional trafficways to
accommodate through-traffic.

**Policy 9.30 Multimodal goods movement.** Develop, maintain, and
enhance a multimodal freight transportation system for the safe,
reliable, sustainable, and efficient movement of goods within and
through the city.

**Policy 9.31** **Economic development and industrial lands.** Ensure
that the transportation system supports traded sector economic
development plans and full utilization of prime industrial land,
including brownfield redevelopment.

**Policy 9.32 Multimodal system and hub.** Maintain Portland’s role as a
multimodal hub for global and regional movement of goods. Enhance
Portland’s network of multimodal freight corridors.

**Policy 9.33 Freight network.** Develop, manage, and maintain a safe,
efficient, and reliable freight street network to provide freight access
to and from intermodal freight facilities, industrial and commercial
districts, and the regional transportation system. Invest to accommodate
forecasted growth of interregional freight volumes and provide access to
truck, marine, rail, and air transportation systems. Ensure designated
routes and facilities are adequate for over-dimensional trucks and
emergency equipment.

**Policy 9.34 Sustainable freight system.** Support the efficient
delivery of goods and services to businesses and neighborhoods, while
also reducing environmental and neighborhood impacts. Encourage the use
of energy efficient and clean delivery vehicles, and manage on- and
off-street loading spaces to ensure adequate access for deliveries to
businesses, while maintaining access to homes and businesses.

**Policy 9.35 Freight rail network.** Coordinate with stakeholders and
regional partners to support continued reinvestment in, and
modernization of, the freight rail network.

**Policy 9.36 Portland Harbor.** Coordinate with the Port of Portland,
private stakeholders, and regional partners to improve and maintain
access to marine terminals and related river-dependent uses in Portland
Harbor.

**9.36.a.** Support continued reinvestment in, and modernization of,
marine terminals in Portland Harbor.

**9.36.b.** Facilitate continued maintenance of the shipping channels in
Portland Harbor and the Columbia River.

**9.36.c.** Support shifting more long-distance, high-volume movement of
goods to river and oceangoing ships and rail.

*See Policy 3.71 for the river transportation policy.*

**Policy 9.37 Portland Heliport.** Maintain Portland’s Heliport
functionality in the Central City.

**Policy 9.38 Automobile transportation.** Maintain acceptable levels of
mobility and access for private automobiles while reducing overall
vehicle miles traveled (VMT) and negative impacts of private automobiles
on the environment and human health.

**Policy 9.39 Automobile efficiency.** Coordinate land use and
transportation plans and programs with other public and private
stakeholders to encourage vehicle technology innovation, shifts toward
electric and other cleaner, more energy-efficient vehicles and fuels,
integration of smart vehicle technology with intelligent transportation
systems, and greater use of options such as car-share, carpool, and
taxi.

**Policy 9.40 Emergency response**. Maintain a network of accessible
emergency response streets to facilitate safe and expedient emergency
response and evacuation. Ensure that police, fire, ambulance, and other
emergency providers can reach their destinations in a timely fashion,
without negatively impacting traffic calming and other measures intended
to reduce crashes and improve safety.

**Airport Futures**\
The Port of Portland manages the Portland International Airport (PDX) as
a regional, national, and international air transportation hub. The Port
partnered with the City of Portland and Multnomah, Washington, and
Clackamas Counties to prepare the Airport Futures Plan (2010) and guide
airport development to 2035. Policy direction set in this project
include Goal 9.I and the following policies. *Additional airport-related
policies are found in Chapter 4: Design and Development and Chapter 7:
Environment and Watershed Health. *

**Policy 9.41 Portland International Airport.** Maintain the Portland
International Airport as an important regional, national, and
international transportation hub serving the bi-state economy.

**Policy 9.42 Airport regulations.** Implement the Airport Futures Plan
through the implementation of the Portland International Airport Plan
District.

> **9.42.a.** Prohibit the development of a potential third parallel
> runway at PDX unless need for its construction is established through
> a transparent, thorough, and regional planning process.
>
> **9.42.b.** Support implementation of the Aircraft Landing Zone to
> provide safer operating conditions for aircraft in the vicinity of
> Portland International Airport by limiting the height of structures,
> vegetation, and construction equipment.
>
> **9.42.c.** Support the Port of Portland’s Wildlife Hazard Management
> Plan by implementing airport-specific landscaping requirements in the
> Portland International Airport Plan District to reduce conflicts
> between wildlife and aircraft.

**Policy 9.43 Airport partnerships.** Partner with the Port of Portland
and the regional community to address the critical interconnection
between economic development, environmental stewardship, and social
responsibility. Support an ongoing public advisory committee for PDX to:

> **9.43.a.** Support meaningful and collaborative public dialogue and
> engagement on airport related planning and development.
>
> **9.43.b.** Provide an opportunity for the community to inform the
> decision-making related to the airport of the Port, the City of
> Portland, and other jurisdictions/organizations in the region.

**9.43.c.** Raise public knowledge about PDX and impacted communities.

**Policy 9.44 Airport investments.** Ensure that new development and
redevelopment of airport facilities supports the City’s and the Port’s
sustainability goals and policies, and is in accordance with Figure 9-3
— Portland International Airport. Allow the Port flexibility in
configuring airport facilities to preserve future development options,
minimize environmental impacts, use land resources efficiently, maximize
operational efficiency, ensure development can be effectively phased,
and address Federal Aviation Administration’s airport design criteria.

**System management**\
Portland’s transportation system is an integrated network of roads,
rails, trails, sidewalks, bicycle paths, and other facilities within and
through the city. These modal networks intersect and are often located
within the same right-of-way. The policies below provide direction to
manage the system in ways that:

-   Allow different modes to interact safely.

-   Maximize the capacity of the existing network.

-   Identify where additional capacity might be needed.

*Also see Policies 8.37 through 8.49 in Chapter 8: Public Facilities and
Services.*

**Policy 9.45** **System management**. Give preference to transportation
improvements that use existing roadway capacity efficiently and that
improve the safety of the system for all users.

**Policy 9.46 Traffic management**. Evaluate and encourage traffic speed
and volume to be consistent with street classifications and desired land
uses to improve safety, preserve and enhance neighborhood livability,
and meet system goals of calming vehicle traffic through a combination
of enforcement, engineering, and education efforts.

**Policy 9.47** **Connectivity**. Establish an interconnected,
multimodal transportation system to serve centers and other significant
locations. Promote a logical, direct, and connected street system
through street spacing guidelines and district-specific street plans
found in the Transportation System Plan, and prioritize access to
specific places by certain modes in accordance with policies 9.6 and
9.7.

**Policy 9.48 Technology.** Encourage the use of emerging vehicle and
parking technology to improve real-time management of the transportation
network and to manage and allocate parking supply and demand.

**Policy 9.49 Performance measures.** Establish multimodal performance
measures and measures of system completeness to evaluate and monitor the
adequacy of transportation services based on performance measures in
goals 9.A. through 9.I. Use these measures to evaluate overall system
performance, inform corridor and area-specific plans and investments,
identify project and program needs, evaluate and prioritize investments,
and regulate development, institutional campus growth, zone changes,
Comprehensive Plan Map amendments, and conditional uses.

**Policy 9.50 Regional congestion management**. Coordinate with Metro to
establish new regional multimodal mobility standards that prioritize
transit, freight, and system completeness.

> **9.50.a.** Create a regional congestion management approach,
> including a market-based system, to price or charge for auto trips and
> parking, better account for the cost of auto trips, and to more
> efficiently manage the regional system.
>
> **9.50.b.** In the interim, use the deficiency thresholds and
> operating standards of the Regional Mobility Policy, in Figure 9‐4,
> for evaluation of impacts to state facilities and the regional
> arterial and throughway network.

**Policy 9.51** **Multimodal Mixed-Use Area.** Designate a Central City
Multimodal Mixed-Use Area (MMA) in the geography indicated in Figure
9‐2, which will render state congestion / mobility standards
inapplicable to proposed plan amendments under OAR 660-0012-0060(10),
subject to ODOT concurrence and execution of an agreement between ODOT
and the City of Portland. The agreement should emphasize potential
safety and operational impacts.

**Transportation Demand Management**

Providing residents and employees information and incentives to walk,
bicycle, use transit, and otherwise reduce the need to own and use
private vehicles can be one of the quickest, least expensive, and most
effective strategies to achieve City goals and to prevent traffic and
parking impacts. Transportation and parking demand management (TDM)
programs can cost-effectively increase the modal share of walking,
bicycling, and shared vehicle trips.

**Policy 9.52 Outreach**. Create and maintain TDM outreach programs that
work with Transportation Management Associations (TMA), residents,
employers, and employees that increase the modal share of walking,
bicycling, and shared vehicle trips while reducing private vehicle
ownership, parking demand, and drive-alone trips, especially during peak
periods.

**Policy 9.53 New development**. Create and maintain TDM regulations and
services that prevent and reduce traffic and parking impacts from new
development and redevelopment. Encourage coordinated area-wide delivery
of TDM programs. Monitor and improve the performance of private-sector
TDM programs.

**Policy 9.54 Projects and programs.** Integrate TDM information into
transportation project and program development and implementation to
increase use of new multimodal transportation projects and services.

**Parking management\
**Vibrant urban places link people and activities. As Portland grows, we
must manage both the demand and supply of parking to achieve climate,
health, livability, and prosperity goals. Providing too much and/or
underpriced parking can lead to more driving and less walking, cycling,
and transit use; inefficient land use patterns; and sprawl. Insufficient
parking can negatively affect neighborhood livability and economic
vitality. These policies provide guidance to manage parking demand and
supply to meet a variety of public objectives, including achieving
compact walkable communities, reducing private vehicle ownership and
overall vehicle use, enhancing livability, reducing pollution, and
expanding\
economic opportunity.

**Policy 9.55 Parking management.** Reduce parking demand and manage
supply to improve pedestrian, bicycle and transit mode share,
neighborhood livability, safety, business district vitality, vehicle
miles traveled (VMT) reduction, and air quality. Implement strategies
that reduce demand for new parking and private vehicle ownership, and
that help maintain optimal parking occupancy and availability.

**Policy 9.56 Curb Zone.** Recognize that the Curb Zone is a public
space, a physical and spatial asset that has value and cost. Evaluate
whether, when, and where parking is the highest and best use of this
public space in support of broad City policy goals and local land use
context. Establish thresholds to utilize parking management and pricing
tools in areas with high parking demand to ensure adequate on-street
parking supply during peak periods.

**Policy 9.57 On-street parking.** Manage parking and loading demand,
supply, and operations in the public right of way to achieve mode share
objectives, and to encourage safety, economic vitality, and livability.
Use transportation demand management and pricing of parking in areas
with high parking demand.

**Policy 9.58 Off-street parking.** Limit the development of new parking
spaces to achieve land use, transportation, and environmental goals,
especially in locations with frequent transit service. Regulate
off-street parking to achieve mode share objectives, promote compact and
walkable urban form, encourage lower rates of car ownership, and promote
the vitality of commercial and employment areas. Use transportation
demand management and pricing of parking in areas with high parking
demand. Strive to provide adequate but not excessive off-street parking
where needed, consistent with the\
preceding practices.

**Policy 9.59 Share space and resources.** Encourage the shared use of
parking and vehicles to maximize the efficient use of limited urban
space.

**Policy 9**.**60** **Cost and price.** Recognize the high public and
private cost of parking by encouraging prices that reflect the cost of
providing parking and balance demand and supply. Discourage employee and
resident parking subsidies.

**Policy 9.61 Bicycle parking.** Promote the development of new bicycle
parking facilities including dedicated bike parking in the public
right-of-way. Provide sufficient bicycle parking at high-capacity
transit stations to enhance bicycle connection opportunities. Require
provision of adequate off-street bicycle parking for new development and
redevelopment. Encourage the provision of parking for different types of
bicycles. In establishing the standards for long-term bicycle parking,
consider the needs of persons with different levels of ability.

**Finance, programs, and coordination\
**Programs and funding are required to build and maintain the
transportation system, and they are necessary to help decide what
projects to build. They also provide public information about what
facilities are available and how they can be used. Agencies outside the
City also own and operate facilities within Portland and provide funding
for new facilities. These policies address essential funding and
coordination opportunities with other agencies, as well outreach and
education programming.

**Policy 9.62** **Coordination**. Coordinate with state and federal
agencies, local and regional governments, special districts, other City
bureaus, and providers of transportation services when planning for,
developing, and funding transportation facilities and services.

**Policy 9.63** **New development impacts.** Prevent, reduce, and
mitigate the impacts of new development and redevelopment on the
transportation system. Utilize strategies including transportation and
parking demand management, transportation system analysis, and system
and local impact mitigation improvements and fees.

**Policy 9.64 Education and encouragement.** Create, maintain, and
coordinate educational and encouragement programs that support
multimodal transportation and that emphasize safety for all modes of
transportation. Ensure that these programs are accessible to
historically under-served and under-represented populations.

**Policy 9.65 Telecommuting.** Promote telecommuting and the use of
communications technology to reduce travel demand.

**Policy 9.66** **Project and program selection criteria.** Establish
transportation project and program selection criteria consistent with
goals 9A through 9I, to cost-effectively achieve access, placemaking,
sustainability, equity, health, prosperity, and safety goals.

**Policy 9.67** **Funding.** Encourage the development of a range of
stable transportation funding sources that provide adequate resources to
build and maintain an equitable and sustainable transportation system.

**Chapter 8: Public Facilities and Services**

**Funding\
**Portland’s investments in the public facility systems necessary to
serve designated land uses are funded through a variety of mechanisms,
including taxes, user rates and fees, system development charges, and
partnerships. The policies in this section acknowledge and support
cost-effective service provision, maintenance of diverse funding streams
to support the public’s investments, and equitable sharing of the costs
of investing in and maintaining the City’s public facilities.

**Policy 8.27 Cost-effectiveness**. Establish, improve, and maintain the
public facilities necessary to serve designated land uses in ways that
cost-effectively provide desired levels of service, consider facilities’
lifecycle costs, and maintain the City’s long-term financial
sustainability.

**Policy 8.28 Shared costs**. Ensure the costs of constructing and
providing public facilities and services are equitably shared by those
who benefit from the provision of those facilities and services.

**Policy 8.29 System development**. Require private or public entities
whose prospective development or redevelopment actions contribute to the
need for public facility improvements, extensions, or construction to
bear a proportional share of the costs.

**Policy 8.30** **Partnerships.** Maintain or establish public and
private partnerships for the development, management, or stewardship of
public facilities necessary to serve designated land uses, as
appropriate.

**Public benefits\
**The following policies support investments to improve equity, economic
prosperity, human and watershed health, and resiliency while minimizing
negative impacts. They also recognize that the public facility and
service needs, and the appropriate approaches to meeting those needs,
vary throughout the city. *See Chapter 2: Community Involvement* for
policies related to community engagement in public facility decisions.

**Policy 8.31 Application of Guiding Principles**. Plan and invest in
public facilities in ways that promote and balance the Guiding
Principles established in The Vision and Guiding Principles of this
Comprehensive Plan.

**Policy 8**.**32 Community benefits.** Encourage providing additional
community benefits with large public facility projects as appropriate to
address environmental justice policies in Chapter 2: Community
Involvement.

**Policy 8**.**33 Community knowledge and experience.** Encourage public
engagement processes and strategies for large public facility projects
to include community members in identifying potential impacts,
mitigation measures, and community benefits.

**Policy 8.34 Resource efficiency**. Reduce the energy and resource use,
waste, and carbon emissions from facilities necessary to serve
designated land uses to meet adopted City goals and targets.

**Policy 8.35 Natural systems**. Protect, enhance, and restore natural
systems and features for their infrastructure service and other values.

**Policy 8.36 Context-sensitive infrastructure**. Design, improve, and
maintain public rights-of-way and facilities in ways that are compatible
with, and that minimize negative impacts on, their physical,
environmental, and community context.

**Policy 8.37 Site- and area-specific needs.** Allow for site- and
area-specific public facility standards, requirements, tools, and
policies as needed to address distinct topographical, geologic,
environmental, and other conditions.

**Policy 8.38 Age-friendly public facilities.** Promote public facility
designs that make Portland more age-friendly.

**Public rights-of-way\
**The policies in this section support the role of public rights-of-way
in providing multiple public services, including multimodal
transportation access and movement, stormwater management, water
distribution, private utilities, tree canopy, and community use, among
others. Current practices and the Portland Plan regard public
rights-of-way as a coordinated and interconnected network that provides
a place for these multiple public facilities and functions.

**Policy 8.39 Interconnected network**. Establish a safe and connected
rights-of-way system that equitably provides infrastructure services
throughout the city.

**Policy 8.40 Transportation function**. Improve and maintain the
right-of-way to support multimodal transportation mobility and access to
goods and services as is consistent with the designated street
classification.

**Policy 8.41 Utility function**. Improve and maintain the right-of-way
to support equitable distribution of utilities, including water,
sanitary sewer, stormwater management, energy, and communications, as
appropriate.

**Policy 8.42 Stormwater management function**. Improve rights-of-way to
integrate green infrastructure and other stormwater management
facilities to meet desired levels-of-service and economic, social, and
environmental objectives.

**Policy 8.43 Trees in rights-of-way.** Integrate trees into public
rights-of-way to support City canopy goals, transportation functions,
and economic, social, and environmental objectives.

**Policy 8.44 Community uses**. Allow community use of rights-of-way for
purposes such as public gathering space, events, food production, or
temporary festivals, as long as the community uses are integrated in
ways that balance and minimize conflict with the designated through
movement and access roles of rights-of-ways.

**Policy 8.45 Pedestrian amenities.** Encourage facilities that enhance
pedestrian enjoyment, such as transit shelters, garbage containers,
benches, etc. in the right of way.

**Policy 8.46 Commercial uses**. Accommodate allowable commercial uses
of the rights-of-way for the purpose of enhancing commercial vitality,
if the commercial uses can be integrated in ways that balance and
minimize conflict with the other functions of the right-of-way. Restrict
the size of signage in the right-of-way.

**Policy 8.47 Flexible design**. Allow flexibility in right-of-way
design and development standards to appropriately reflect the pattern
area and other relevant physical, community, and environmental contexts
and local needs.

**Policy 8.48 Corridors and City Greenways**. Ensure public facilities
located along Civic Corridors, Neighborhood Corridors, and City
Greenways support the multiple objectives established for these
corridors. *Corridor and City Greenway goals and policies are listed in
Chapter 3: Urban Form. *

**Policy 8.49 Coordination**. Coordinate the planning, design,
development, improvement, and maintenance of public rights-of-way among
appropriate public agencies, private providers, and adjacent landowners.

> **8.49.a.** Coordination efforts should include the public facilities
> necessary to support the uses and functions of rights-of-way, as
> established in policies 8.40 to 8.46.
>
> **8.49.b.** Coordinate transportation and stormwater system plans and
> investments, especially in unimproved or substandard rights-of-way, to
> improve water quality, public safety, including for pedestrians and
> bicyclists, and neighborhood livability.

**Policy 8.50 Undergrounding**. Encourage undergrounding of electrical
and telecommunications facilities within public rights-of-way,
especially in centers and along Civic Corridors.

**Policy 8.51 Right-of-way vacations**. Maintain rights-of-way if there
is an established existing or future need for them, such as for
transportation facilities or for other public functions established in
policies 8.40 to 8.46.

**Policy 8.52 Rail rights-of-way.** Preserve existing and abandoned rail
rights-of-way for future rail or public trail uses.

**Trails\
**The City of Portland’s trail system is a key part of both the City’s
multi-modal transportation system and its recreation system. Trails
within this system take many different forms and are located within the
right-of-way and on public and private property. Trails provide
Portlanders with local and regional pedestrian and bicycle connections
and access to many key destinations within the city. They also provide a
place to recreate and allow Portlanders to experience the city’s parks
and natural areas. Trails play a particularly important role in meeting
pedestrian and bicyclist mobility and connectivity needs in western
neighborhoods. *See Western Neighborhood Pattern Area Policies 3.100 and
3.103*. The policies in this section support continued improvement,
management, and coordination of the trail system.

**Policy 8.53 Public trails.** Establish, improve, and maintain a
citywide system of local and regional public trails that provide
transportation and/or recreation options and are a component of larger
network of facilities for bicyclists, pedestrians, and recreational
users.

**Policy 8.54 Trail system connectivity.** Plan, improve, and maintain
the citywide trail system so that it connects and improves access to
Portland’s neighborhoods, commercial areas, employment centers, schools,
parks, natural areas, recreational facilities, regional destinations,
the regional trail system, and other key places that Portlanders access
in their daily lives.

**Policy 8.55 Trail coordination**. Coordinate planning, design,
improvement, and maintenance of the trail system among City agencies,
other public agencies, non-governmental partners, and adjacent
landowners.

**Policy 8.56 Trail diversity.** Allow a variety of trail types to
reflect a trail’s transportation and recreation roles, requirements, and
physical context.

**Policy 8.57 Public access requirements**. Require public access and
improvement of Major Public Trails as shown in Figure 8-2 — Major Public
Trails. Major Public Trails include regional trails and other
significant trail connections that provide for the movement of
pedestrians, cyclists, and other users for recreation and transportation
purposes**. **

**Policy 8.58 Trail and City Greenway coordination.** Coordinate the
planning and improvement of trails as part of the City Greenways system.
*See Chapter 3: Urban Form for additional policies related to City
Greenways.*

**Policy 8.59 Trail and Habitat Corridor coordination.** Coordinate the
planning and improvement of trails with the establishment, enhancement,
preservation, and access to habitat corridors. *See Chapter 3: Urban
Form for additional policies related to Habitat Corridors.*

**Policy 8.60 Intertwine coordination.** Coordinate with the Intertwine
Alliance and its partners, including local and regional parks providers,
to integrate Portland’s trail and active transportation network with the
bi-state regional trail system.

Sanitary and stormwater systems\
The City’s sewer and drainage system accommodates Portland’s current and future needs. It also protects public health, water quality, and the environment. Using asset management and watershed health as goals and guides, the City considers the whole watershed as an interconnected hydrologic system.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The City manages sanitary sewage through an extensive piped collection
and treatment system, including two wastewater treatment plants that
discharge to the Columbia and Willamette rivers. Stormwater is managed
and conveyed through a variety of facilities, including pipes, sumps,
surface facilities, and natural drainageways. Green infrastructure,
including landscaped stormwater facilities and natural resources such as
trees and natural areas, is an important part of the stormwater system.
Private property investments and public-private partnerships also play
key roles in the management of stormwater.

The policies below ensure effective sanitary and stormwater systems.

**Stormwater system**

**Policy 8.68 Stormwater facilities**. Provide adequate stormwater
facilities for conveyance, flow control, and pollution reduction.

**Policy 8.71 Green infrastructure**. Promote the use of green
infrastructure, such as natural areas, the urban forest, and landscaped
stormwater facilities, to manage stormwater.

**Policy 8.72 Stormwater discharge.** Avoid or minimize the impact of
stormwater discharges on the water and habitat quality of rivers and
streams.

**Policy 8.73 On-site stormwater management**. Encourage on-site
stormwater management, or management as close to the source as
practical, through land use decisions and public facility investments.

Chapter 3: Urban Form

**Citywide Design and Development**

**Policy 3.4 All ages and abilities.** Strive for a built environment
that provides a safe, healthful, and attractive environment for people
of all ages and abilities.

**Centers**

Centers are compact and pedestrian-oriented urban places. They are
connected to public transit and active transportation networks. They
anchor complete neighborhoods with retail stores and businesses (grocery
stores, restaurants, markets, shops, etc.), civic amenities (libraries,
schools, community centers, places of worship, etc.), housing options,
health clinics, daycare centers, employment centers, plazas and parks,
or other public gathering places.

Centers will be the primary areas for growth and change in Portland over
the next 20 years. Focusing new growth in centers helps achieve goals of
having more Portlanders live in complete neighborhoods, use public
transit and active transportation — walking, biking, and rolling — to
commute to work and complete errands, and it will help mitigate and
prepare for the effects of climate change. Clustering destinations and
housing within compact, walkable centers makes access by transit,
walking, wheelchair, and bicycle more practical and reduces the amount
of driving needed to access services, reducing the impact on roadways,
reducing congestion, and helps in facilitating freight movement.

Centers range in scale from the Central City’s downtown to small
neighborhood centers, providing local access to services and allowing
Portlanders across the city to live a healthy, active lifestyle.
Neighborhood business districts and the commercial services they provide
are the foundation of many centers, but centers, particularly larger
centers, will also become a focus for public services, gathering places,
and housing growth. In and around all centers, there will be change as
areas urbanize and new services, shops and housing\
are developed.

The UDF identifies four types of centers that vary in size, scale,
service area, local versus regional role, and density of residents and
businesses. The specific boundaries of these centers is shown on the
Comprehensive Plan Map.

The four types are:

1.  Central City

2.  Regional Center (Gateway)

3.  Town Center

4.  Neighborhood Center

Policies in this section identify essential elements and functions of
centers that will be enhanced over time. Additional policies provide
more detailed direction for specific types of centers based on their
scale.

**Policy 3.16 Investments in centers.** Encourage public and private
investment in infrastructure, economic development, and community
services in centers to ensure that all centers will support the
populations they serve.

**Policy 3.19 Accessibility.** Design centers to be compact, safe,
attractive, and accessible places, where the street environment makes
access by transit, walking, biking, and mobility devices such as
wheelchairs, safe and attractive for people of all ages and abilities.

**Policy 3.20 Center connections.** Connect centers to each other and to
other key local and regional destinations, such as schools, parks, and
employment areas, by pedestrian trails and sidewalks, bicycle sharing,
bicycle routes, frequent and convenient transit, and electric vehicle
charging stations. Prepare and adopt future street plans for centers
that currently have poor street connectivity, especially where large
commercial parcels are planned to receive significant additional housing
density.

**Policy 3.21 Green infrastructure in centers.** Integrate nature and
green infrastructure into centers and enhance public views and
connections to the surrounding natural features.

**Central City*\
***The Central City is a living laboratory for how the design and
function of a dense urban center can concurrently provide benefits to
human health, the natural environment, and the local economy. As
Portland is the major center for jobs, transit, services, and civic and
cultural institutions for the entire city and region. The Central City
houses numerous attractions including Portland State University, the
Oregon Convention Center, City Hall, Tom McCall Waterfront Park and the
Willamette River, Pioneer Courthouse Square, and many museums and venues
for artistic and cultural activities and professional sports. The
Central City’s ten unique districts include Downtown, the West End,
Goose Hollow, Pearl, Old Town/Chinatown, Lower Albina, Lloyd, the
Central Eastside, South Waterfront, and South Downtown/University.
Together, these districts provide a diversity of opportunities for urban
living, economic development, retail and entertainment. 

**Policy 3.26 Transportation hub.** Enhance the Central City as the
region’s multimodal transportation hub and optimize regional access as
well as the movement of people and goods among key destinations.

**Gateway Regional Center\
**Gateway Regional Center is East Portland’s major center, providing the
area and region with civic, employment, and community services. It
includes the city’s largest transit hub outside of downtown and good
freeway access to regional destinations such as Portland International
Airport.

**Policy 3.30 Transportation.** Enhance Gateway’s role as a regional
high-capacity transit hub that serves\
as an anchor for East Portland’s multimodal transportation system.

**Town Centers\
**Town Centers are located throughout Portland to serve broad parts of
the city. They are typically anchored by employment centers or
institutions, feature a wide range of commercial and community services,
and have a wide range of housing options. Development in Town Centers is
intended to be up to mid-rise in scale, with larger scale buildings
primarily located close to high-capacity transit stations. Mid-rise
development is typically as high as five to seven stories.

**Policy 3.34 Transportation.** Improve Town Centers as multimodal
transportation hubs that optimize access from the broad area of the city
they serve and are linked to the region’s high-capacity transit system.

**Neighborhood Centers**

Neighborhood Centers are smaller, sometimes village-like centers that
include a mixture of higher density commercial and residential
buildings. Because these centers are smaller than Town Centers, there
are many more of them citywide. Development in Neighborhood Centers is
generally intended to be low-rise in scale, although larger scale can be
appropriate in locations close to high-capacity transit stations or near
the Central City. Low-rise development typically includes buildings up
to four stories in height.

**Policy 3.38 Transportation.** Design Neighborhood Centers as
multimodal transportation hubs that are served by frequent-service
transit and optimize pedestrian and bicycle access from adjacent
neighborhoods.

**Inner Ring Districts **

The Inner Ring Districts include some of Portland’s oldest
neighborhoods, with several historic districts and a broad diversity of
housing types. These areas include distinct districts, such as Albina
and Northwest Portland, that have multiple mixed-use corridors in
proximity (*see the shaded areas in the Urban Design Framework*),
allowing most residents to live within a quarter-mile distance of
frequent-service transit and neighborhood businesses. The Inner Ring
Districts are also served by a highly interconnected system of streets
and sidewalks, and are within a three-mile biking distance of the
Central City’s array of services, jobs, and amenities.

These policies acknowledge that growth in the Inner Ring Districts plays
an important role in allowing more people to have access to their many
opportunities, but also acknowledge that this growth should be
integrated into these areas’ historic urban fabric. The Inner Ring
Districts, especially along their corridors, play a similar role to Town
Centers in accommodating growth.

**Policy 3**.**41** **Corridors.** Guide growth in corridors to
transition to mid-rise scale close to the Central City, especially along
Civic Corridors.

**Policy 3**.**44 Active transportation.** Enhance the role of the Inner
Ring Districts’ extensive transit, bicycle, and pedestrian networks in
conjunction with land uses that optimize the ability for more people to
utilize this network. Improve the safety of pedestrian and bike
connections to the Central City. Strengthen transit connections between
the Inner Ring Districts and to the Central City.

**Corridors\
**Corridors, like centers, are areas where Portland will grow and change
much over the next 20 years. They are busy, active streets with
redevelopment potential. They are close to neighborhoods and are places
with transit, stores, housing, and employers. They need to be planned,
designed, and improved to be places that benefit and become successful
additions to surrounding neighborhoods. The largest places of focused
activity and density along these corridors are designated as centers.

There are two types of street corridors:

1.  Civic Corridors

2.  Neighborhood Corridors

**Policy 3.45 Growth and mobility.** Coordinate transportation and land
use strategies along corridors to accommodate growth and mobility needs
for people of all ages and abilities.

**Policy 3.46 Connections.** Improve corridors as multimodal connections
providing transit, pedestrian, bicycle, and motor vehicle access and
that serve the freight needs of centers and neighborhood business
districts.

**Policy 3.47 Design.** Encourage street design that balances the
important transportation functions of corridors with their roles as the
setting for commercial activity and residential living.

**Policy 3.48 Green infrastructure in corridors.** Enhance corridors
with distinctive green infrastructure, including landscaped stormwater
facilities, extensive tree plantings, and other landscaping that both
provide environmental function and contribute to a quality pedestrian
environment.

**Civic Corridors\
**Civic Corridors are the city’s busiest, widest, and most prominent
streets. They provide major connections among centers, the rest of the
City, and the region. They support the movement of people and goods
across the city, with high levels of traffic and pedestrian activity.
Civic Corridors provide opportunities for growth and transit-supportive
densities of housing, commerce, and employment. Development in Civic
Corridors is intended to be up to mid-rise in scale, with lower scale
generally more appropriate in locations far from the Central City or
transit stations. Mid-rise development typically ranges from five to
seven stories.

Abundant trees and high-quality landscaping beautify Civic Corridors and
offset the impacts of their large paved areas. These corridors exemplify
the benefits of green infrastructure by cleaning and soaking up
stormwater runoff and minimizing urban heat island effects, while also
being enjoyable places to live, work, and gather. Civic corridors are
safe for all types of transportation. Civic Corridors policies apply to
the roadway, the public realm of the street, and the buildings that line
the street.

**Policy 3.49 Integrated land use and mobility.** Enhance Civic
Corridors as distinctive places that are models of ecological urban
design, with transit-supportive densities of housing and employment,
prominent street trees and other green features, and high-quality
transit service and pedestrian and\
bicycle facilities.

**Policy 3.50 Design great places.** Improve public streets and
sidewalks along Civic Corridors to support the vitality of business
districts, create distinctive places, provide a safe, healthy, and
attractive pedestrian environment, and contribute to quality living
environments for residents.

**Policy 3.51 Mobility corridors.** Improve Civic Corridors as key
mobility corridors of citywide importance that accommodate all modes of
transportation within their right-of-way or on nearby parallel routes.

**Policy 3.52 Freight.** Maintain freight mobility and access on Civic
Corridors that are also Major or Priority Truck Streets.

**Neighborhood Corridors**

Neighborhood Corridors are narrower main streets that connect
neighborhoods with each other and to other parts of the city. They have
transportation, land use, and design functions that are important at a
neighborhood or district level. They support neighborhood business
districts and provide housing opportunities close to local services,
amenities, and transit lines. They are streets that include a mix of
commercial and higher-density housing development. This policy is
intended to balance the important transportation functions of
Neighborhood Corridors with their roles in supporting the viability of
business districts and residential livability.

**Policy 3.53 Neighborhood Corridors.** Enhance Neighborhood Corridors
as important places that support vibrant neighborhood business districts
with quality multi-family housing, while providing transportation
connections that link neighborhoods.

**Transit station areas**

Transit stations provide access to high-capacity transit, which
currently consists of the region’s light rail system, and in the future
may also include bus rapid transit. These policies encourage housing and
employment growth in transit station areas to maximize people’s ability
to benefit from the regional connections they provide and to increase
transit access to employment. The policies support a range of transit
station area types, with differing priorities for growth, depending on
the station type and context.

Priority is given to growth in station areas located in centers since
they provide more people with opportunities to be close to both transit
and to commercial and public services. These stations have the highest
potential for mixed use development. Center stations benefit from the
concentration of local services and businesses as well as connections to
other transit routes typically found on corridors. Mixed-use development
with housing is not the priority for all transit station areas; some are
locations for employment, or they serve major regional destinations such
as the Oregon Zoo. *See Figure 3-4 — Transit Station Areas.*

**Policy 3.54 Transit-oriented development.** Encourage transit-oriented
development and transit-supportive concentrations of housing and jobs,
and multimodal connections at and adjacent to high-capacity transit
stations.

**Policy 3.55 Community connections.** Integrate transit stations into
surrounding communities and enhance pedestrian and bicycle facilities
(including bike sharing) to provide safe and accessible connections to
key destinations beyond the station area.

**Policy 3.56 Transit station area safety.** Design transit areas to
improve pedestrian, bicycle, and personal safety.

**City Greenways**

City Greenways are a system of distinctive pedestrian- and
bicycle-friendly streets and trails, enhanced by lush tree canopy and
landscaped stormwater facilities that support active living by expanding
transportation and recreational opportunities and making it easier and
more attractive to reach destinations across the city. As Portland
continues to grow, the City Greenways system will strengthen connections
to nature, weave green elements into neighborhoods, and enhance mobility
and recreation.

City Greenways are a network that includes the following types of
infrastructure:

1.  Enhanced greenway corridors are distinctive streets with extensive
    tree canopy and landscaped stormwater facilities that provide
    connections between major centers, schools, parks, natural areas,
    and the rivers. Enhanced greenway corridors often involve
    improvements to existing streets, including wide planting strips and
    other features that provide space for large-canopy trees.

2.  Trails are designated routes on land or water that provide public
    access for recreation or transportation purposes, such as walking
    and bicycling. They are often located along rivers, through natural
    areas, or along rail or highway rights-of-way, with connections to
    and through neighborhoods.

3.  Heritage parkways are iconic streets or segments of streets with
    elements such as linear parkways, scenic views, and distinctive
    landscaping or street design.

4.  Neighborhood greenways are an extensive network of streets with low
    volumes of motor vehicle traffic that are prioritized for bicycles
    and enhance the pedestrian environment, working in conjunction with
    the rest of the City Greenways system to extend the system into
    all neighborhoods.

*See Figure 3-5 – City Greenways.*

**Policy 3.61 Connections.** Create a network of distinctive and
attractive City Greenways that link centers, parks, schools, rivers,
natural areas, and other key community destinations.

**Policy 3.62 Integrated system.** Create an integrated City Greenways
system that includes regional trails through natural areas and along
Portland’s rivers, connected to neighborhood greenways, and heritage
parkways.

**Policy 3.63 Multiple benefits.** Design City Greenways that provide
multiple benefits that contribute to Portland’s pedestrian, bicycle,
green infrastructure, and parks and open space systems.

**Policy 3.64 Design.** Use design options such as distinctive street
design, motor vehicle diversion, landscaping, tree plantings, scenic
views, and other appropriate design options, to create City Greenways
that extend the experience of open spaces and nature into neighborhoods,
while improving stormwater management and calming traffic.

*Additional policies related to City Greenways are provided in Chapter
9: Transportation.*

**Employment areas**

Portland is a major employment center in the region and the state. The
diversity of the economy is spread evenly among four types of business
sectors that thrive in different parts of the city: industrial, office,
institutional, and retail/service. The city’s employment geographies
are:

**Central City:** The Central City is the region’s high-density
employment center. It is primarily an office district for professional
and business services, finance, information, software, and government.
It is also a key location for the entertainment, small industry, and\
education sectors.

**Industrial Districts:** Industrial districts are in the low, flat
areas along Portland Harbor and the Columbia Corridor, Oregon’s freight
infrastructure hub. Manufacturing and distribution sectors concentrate
here. They typically need one-story buildings, medium to large sites,
and locations buffered from housing. There is also an industrial
district in the Central Eastside and smaller industrial areas scattered
around the city, mostly adjacent to major transportation hubs.

**Neighborhood Commercial**: Neighborhood Commercial areas are mainly
home to the retail, personal service, and related sectors that serve
customers on-site. These businesses locate amid their market areas,
lining corridors across the city. They generally need ground-floor space
along pedestrian or auto-oriented streets.

**Campus Institutions:** Institutions in the health care and education
sectors are concentrated in large hospital and college campuses and
dispersed smaller facilities. Major institutions are large employers
with campuses that vary from pastoral expanses to more concentrated
urban grounds. They are located throughout the city, often in or
adjacent to\
residential areas.

Each of these sectors is growing, and each has different land use needs
and offers different prosperity benefits. Traded sector (export)
businesses bring income and jobs into the region and are mainly in the
industrial and office sectors. Middle-wage jobs that require less
college education and offer upward mobility are concentrated in the
industrial sectors. Office jobs offer a wide variety of wages and are
mainly concentrated in the Central City but are also distributed in
neighborhood business districts.

Retail and service sector jobs are concentrated in the Central City and
neighborhood business districts. They provide needed services to
residents and include many locally-owned businesses; they do not
typically offer higher-paying employment opportunities. The health care
and education sectors are the leading job growth opportunities, most of
which are located on major campuses. Healthcare is one of the city’s
fastest growing\
employment sectors.

**Regional Truck Corridors:** Maintaining the primary truck routes into
and through the city supports Portland’s role as an important West Coast
hub and a gateway for international and domestic trade. These streets
are integral to the growth of traded sector businesses such as
manufacturing, warehousing and distribution industries.

**Policy 3**.**69** **Regional Truck Corridors.** Enhance designated
streets to accommodate forecast freight growth and support intensified
industrial use in nearby freight districts. *See Figure 3-7 — Employment
Areas.* Designated regional truckways and priority truck streets
(Transportation System Plan classifications are shown to illustrate this
network).

**Pattern Areas\
**Portland has five distinct Pattern Areas. The development patterns and
characteristics of these areas are influenced by the natural landscape
and how and when these parts of the city were developed.

1.  Rivers

2.  Central City

3.  Inner Neighborhoods

4.  Western Neighborhoods

5.  Eastern Neighborhoods

Each Pattern Area has unique physical, social, cultural, and
environmental qualities that differentiate them and create their sense
of place. To maintain and enhance the positive qualities and sense of
place in each pattern area, it is desirable to have policies and
regulations that respond to each area’s unique natural and built assets.

The following policies identify key positive characteristics of each of
Portland’s Pattern Areas that are relevant to decisions related to
future development in these areas. Area and neighborhood plans should be
consulted for more detailed guidance on design priorities in different
parts of the city.

**Rivers Pattern Area\
**Human settlement began along and at the confluence of the Willamette
and Columbia rivers because it offered Native Americans plentiful food,
natural resources, and critically-important trade and transportation
opportunities. After white immigrants began moving to the area, the
settlement grew into the city of Portland. As the city’s initial
form-giving features, the two rivers have continued to shape the city.

Today, the Willamette and Columbia rivers continue to serve multiple
functions and roles.

The rivers:

-   Are features of significant historic and cultural significance to
    Native American tribes and others throughout the region.

-   Serve as essential industrial transportation corridors that support
    the local and regional economy.

-   Support recreational, subsistence, and commercial fisheries.

-   Provide important habitat for resident and migratory fish
    and wildlife.

-   Are important scenic, recreational, and transportation amenities for
    Portlanders\
    and visitors.

These policies foster development and land stewardship approaches that
recognize, support, and balance the varied systems, uses, and activities
along the Columbia and Willamette rivers, including: the Portland
Harbor, Columbia Corridor, and other prime industrial lands; habitat
areas and corridors; distinctive riverfront neighborhoods along the
banks; and access to, along, and within the rivers.

**Policy 3.71 River transportation.** Recognize and enhance the roles of
the Willamette and Columbia rivers as part of Portland’s historic,
current, and future transportation infrastructure, including for
freight, commerce, commuting, and other public and private
transportation functions.

**Policy 3.73 Industry and port facilities.** Enhance the regionally
significant economic infrastructure that includes Oregon’s largest
seaport and largest airport, unique multimodal freight, rail, and harbor
access; the region’s critical energy hub; and proximity to anchor
manufacturing and\
distribution facilities.

**Policy 3.77 River access.** Enhance and complete Portland’s system of
river access points and riverside trails, including the Willamette
Greenway Trail, and strengthen active transportation connections between
neighborhoods and the rivers.

**Policy 3.83 Willamette River Greenway.** Maintain multi-objective
plans and regulations to guide development, infrastructure investments,
and natural resource protection and enhancement within and along the
Willamette Greenway.

**Central City Pattern Area\
**The Central City is home to Portland’s greatest concentrations of
employment, and civic, cultural, and higher education institutions.
Primary natural features include the Willamette River, large street
trees, green streets and landscaping, and corridors of park blocks that
further weave nature into the Central City. The area’s high-density
mixed-use neighborhoods contribute to the distinct identities of
different areas within the Central City. These policies highlight some
key design priorities for the Central City related to its distinctive
urban form. These policies encourage design in the Central City that
enhances its role as the region’s center of innovation and exchange, in
recognition that a healthy city must have a healthy core.

*Additional policies related to the design of the Central City are
provided in the Centers section of this chapter.*

**Policy 3.86 Central City pedestrian system.** Maintain and expand the
Central City’s highly interconnected pedestrian system.

**Policy 3.87** **Central City bicycle system.** Expand and improve the
Central City’s bicycle system.

**Inner Neighborhoods Pattern Area\
**The Inner Neighborhoods were developed and shaped during the Streetcar
Era of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The Inner Neighborhoods
are characterized by a regular pattern of neighborhood business
districts located along former streetcar streets interspersed with
residential areas. This Pattern Area has a small block pattern with an
interconnected street grid that make transit, walking, and bicycling
attractive options. Within this Pattern Area is an inner ring of
neighborhoods that provide important opportunities for additional
housing close to the Central City, but where future growth should be
integrated into the existing and historic context. *See the Inner Ring
Districts section in this chapter*. These policies express the overall
design approach in Inner Neighborhoods.

**Policy 3.88 Inner Neighborhoods main streets.** Maintain and enhance
the Streetcar Era pattern of street-oriented buildings along Civic and
Neighborhood corridors.

**Policy 3.89 Inner Neighborhoods street patterns.** Preserve the area’s
urban fabric of compact blocks and its highly interconnected grid of
streets.

**Policy 3.91 Inner Neighborhoods active transportation.** Use the
extensive street, sidewalk, and bikeway system and multiple connections
to the Central City as a key part of Portland’s active transportation
system.

**Policy 3.92 Inner Neighborhoods residential areas.** Continue the
patterns of small, connected blocks, regular lot patterns, and streets
lined by planting strips and street trees in Inner Neighborhood
residential areas.

**Eastern Neighborhoods Pattern Area\
**Portland’s Eastern Neighborhoods feature a diverse range of urban and
natural landscapes. Many structures in the Eastern Neighborhoods, which
also include parts of Brentwood-Darlington and Cully, were developed
after World War II. In addition, most of this this area was annexed into
the City of Portland after the 1980 Comprehensive Plan was completed.
The policies for the Eastern Neighborhoods promote design that responds
to and enhances the area’s distinctive mix of urban patterns and natural
features, such as groves of Douglas firs, the East Buttes, and streams.
Some policies address the opportunities and challenges presented by the
area’s large blocks, deep lots, gaps in pedestrian and bicycle
connectivity, and wide street corridors.

The Eastern Neighborhoods provide opportunities for new and distinctive
approaches to the design of development and infrastructure that can
enhance the area’s positive characteristics and improve quality of life.
It is important to continue the area’s verdant character and provide a
more livable environment, while reducing disparities and increasing
access to services.

**Policy 3.93 Eastern Neighborhoods street, block, and lot pattern.**
Guide the evolving street and block system in the Eastern Neighborhoods
in ways that build on positive aspects of the area’s large blocks, such
as opportunities to continue mid-block open space patterns and create
new connections through blocks that make it easier to access community
destinations.

**Policy 3.94 Eastern Neighborhoods site development.** Require that
land be aggregated into larger sites before land divisions and other
redevelopment occurs. Require site plans which advance design and street
connectivity goals.

**Policy 3.95 Eastern Neighborhoods trees and natural features.**
Encourage development and right-of-way design that preserves and
incorporates Douglas fir trees and groves, and that protects the area’s
streams, forests, wetlands, steep slopes, and buttes.

**Policy 3.97 Eastern Neighborhoods corridor landscaping.** Encourage
landscaped building setbacks along residential corridors on major
streets.

**Policy 3.98 Eastern Neighborhoods active transportation.** Enhance
access to centers, employment areas, and other community destinations in
Eastern Neighborhoods by ensuring that corridors have safe and
accessible pedestrian and bicycle facilities and creating additional
secondary connections that provide low-stress pedestrian and bicycle
access.

**Western Neighborhoods Pattern Area\
**The Western Neighborhoods have been shaped by their location within
the terrain of Portland’s west hills. Much of this area was developed
after World War II. These policies encourage design that responds to the
area's prominent characteristics, such as its hilly topography, streams,
ravines, and forested slopes, while cultivating a built environment that
expands mobility and accessibility for all people. These design
approaches are intended to apply to a range of development types and
locations.

**Policy 3.100 Western Neighborhoods active transportation.** Provide
safe and accessible pedestrian and bicycle connections, as well as
off-street trail connections, to and from residential neighborhoods.

**Policy 3.103 Western Neighborhoods trails.** Develop
pedestrian-oriented connections and enhance the Western Neighborhoods’
distinctive system of trails to increase safety, expand mobility, access
to nature, and active living opportunities in the area.

**Design and Development Policies (Comp Plan Chapter 4)**

Portland’s neighborhoods have distinct characteristics and street
environments that provide a sense of place and that are a setting for
public life. The following policies guide building and site design to
respond to positive characteristics of their context and promote
accessible and attractive public environments. They also support
designing development to contribute to the quality of the public realm
of streets and other open spaces, and encourage the integration of
natural elements into the built environment.

**Policy 4.1 Pattern areas.** Encourage building and site designs that
respect the unique built natural, historic, and cultural characteristics
of Portland’s five pattern areas described in Chapter 3: Urban Form.

**Policy 4.2 Community identity.** Encourage the development of
character-giving design features that are responsive to place and the
cultures of communities.

**Policy 4.3 Site and context.** Encourage development that responds to
and enhances the positive qualities of site and context — the
neighborhood, the block, the public realm, and natural features.

**Policy 4.4 Natural features and green infrastructure.** Integrate
natural and green infrastructure such as trees, green spaces, ecoroofs,
gardens, green walls, and vegetated stormwater management systems, into
the urban environment. Encourage stormwater facilities that are designed
to be a functional and attractive element of public spaces, especially
in centers and corridors.

**Policy 4.5 Pedestrian-oriented design.** Enhance the pedestrian
experience throughout Portland through public and private development
that creates accessible, safe, and attractive places for all those who
walk and/or use wheelchairs or other mobility devices.

**Policy 4.6 Street orientation.** Promote building and site designs
that enhance the pedestrian experience with windows, entrances,
pathways, and other features that provide connections to the street
environment.

**Policy 4.7 Development and public spaces.** Guide development to help
create high-quality public places and street environments while
considering the role of adjacent development in framing, shaping, and
activating the public space of streets and urban parks.

**Policy 4.8 Alleys.** Encourage the continued use of alleys for parking
access, while preserving pedestrian access. Expand the number of
alley-facing accessory dwelling units.

**Policy 4.9 Transitional urbanism.** Encourage temporary activities and
structures in places that are transitioning to urban areas to promote
job creation, entrepreneurship, active streets, and human interaction.

**Design and development of centers and corridors\
**Centers and corridors are places where large numbers of people live,
work, and visit. Careful attention to the design of centers and
corridors is necessary to ensure that they become places where people
want to live and gather, and where getting around by walking, biking, or
wheelchair is an attractive choice. These policies also encourage the
development of centers as places that reflect the character and cultures
of the surrounding neighborhoods.

**Policy 4.20 Walkable scale.** Focus services and higher-density
housing in the core of centers to support a critical mass of demand for
commercial services and more walkable access for customers.

**Policy 4.21 Street environment.** Encourage development in centers and
corridors to include amenities that create a pedestrian-oriented
environment and provide places for people to sit, spend time, and
gather.

**Policy 4.22 Relationship between building height and street size.**
Encourage development in centers and corridors that is responsive to
street space width, thus allowing taller buildings on wider streets.

**Policy 4.23 Design for pedestrian and bicycle access.** Provide
accessible sidewalks, high-quality bicycle access, and frequent street
connections and crossings in centers and corridors.

**Designing with nature\
**Incorporating natural features and functions into development improves
human and ecological health, yielding tangible social, environmental,
and economic benefits. Designing with nature provides or enhances
ecosystem services, such as stormwater management, cooling of air and
water, reduction of landslide, wildfire and flooding risks, protection
or enhancement of fish and wildlife habitat, and opportunities for
Portlanders to enjoy nature in their daily lives. These policies apply
to a broad range of land uses and development sites, encouraging
development designed to enhance the identity and beauty of Portland’s
neighborhoods, business districts, and industrial districts, while
improving watershed health and resilience to climate change.

*Additional goals and policies about the integration of nature into the
built environment and infrastructure are found in Chapter 7: Environment
and Watershed Health, Chapter 8: Public Facilities and Services, and
Chapter 9: Transportation.*

**Policy 4.73 Design with nature.** Encourage design and site
development practices that enhance, and avoid the degradation of,
watershed health and ecosystem services and that incorporate trees and
vegetation.

**Policy 4.74 Flexible development options.** Encourage flexibility in
the division of land, the siting and design of buildings, and other
improvements to reduce the impact of development on
environmentally-sensitive areas and to retain healthy native and
beneficial vegetation and trees.

**Policy 4.75 Low-impact development and best practices.** Encourage use
of low-impact development, habitat-friendly development, bird-friendly
design, and green infrastructure.

**Policy 4.76 Impervious surfaces.** Limit use of and strive to reduce
impervious surfaces and associated impacts on hydrologic function, air
and water quality, habitat connectivity, tree canopy, and urban heat
island effects.
